With a look of ineffable pride and consciousness of his own position, he gave his hand to the messenger of
victory. The latter, embracing his countryman, continued:
"Yes, we have a right to feel proud and happy, Phanes; you especially, for no sooner had the judges
unanimously awarded the prize to Cimon, than he ordered the heralds to proclaim the tyrant Pisistratus as the
owner of the splendid team, and therefore victor in the race. Pisistratus at once caused it to be announced that
your family was free to return to Athens, and so now, Phanes, the long-wished for hour of your return home is
awaiting you."
But at these words Phanes turned pale, his look of conscious pride changed into one of indignation, and he
exclaimed:
"At this I am to rejoice, foolish Kallias? rather bid me weep that a descendant of Ajax should be capable of
laying his well-won fame thus ignominiously at a tyrant's feet! No! I swear by Athene, by Father Zeus, and by
Apollo, that I will sooner starve in foreign lands than take one step homeward, so long as the Pisistratidae
hold my country in bondage. When I leave the service of Amasis, I shall be free, free as a bird in the air; but I
would rather be the slave of a peasant in foreign lands, than hold the highest office under Pisistratus. The
sovereign power in Athens belongs to us, its nobles; but Cimon by laying his chaplet at the feet of Pisistratus
has acknowledged the tyrants, and branded himself as their servant. He shall hear that Phanes cares little for
the tyrant's clemency. I choose to remain an exile till my country is free, till her nobles and people govern
themselves, and dictate their own laws. Phanes will never do homage to the oppressor, though all the
Philaidae, the Alkmaeonidae, and even the men of your own house, Kallias, the rich Daduchi, should fall
down at his feet!"
With flashing eyes he looked round on the assembly; Kallias too scrutinized the faces of the guests with
conscious pride, as if he would say:
"See, friends, the kind of men produced by my glorious country!"
Taking the hand of Phanes again, he said to him: "The tyrants are as hateful to me as to you, my friend; but I
have seen, that, so long as Pisistratus lives, the tyranny cannot be overthrown. His allies, Lygdamis of Naxos
and Polykrates of Samos, are powerful; but the greatest danger for our freedom lies in his own moderation and
prudence. During my recent stay in Greece I saw with alarm that the mass of the people in Athens love their
oppressor like a father. Notwithstanding his great power, he leaves the commonwealth in the enjoyment of
Solon's constitution. He adorns the city with the most magnificent buildings. They say that the new temple of
Zeus, now being built of glorious marble by Kallaeschrus, Antistates and Porinus (who must be known to you,
Theodorus), will surpass every building that has yet been erected by the Hellenes. He understands how to
attract poets and artists of all kinds to Athens, he has had the poems of Homer put into writing, and the
prophecies of Musaeus collected by Onomakritus. He lays out new streets and arranges fresh festivals; trade
flourishes under his rule, and the people find themselves well off, in spite of the many taxes laid upon them.
But what are the people? a vulgar multitude who, like the gnats, fly towards every thing brilliant, and, so long
as the taper burns, will continue to flutter round it, even though they burn their wings in doing so. Let
Pisistratus' torch burn out, Phanes, and I'll swear that the fickle crowd will flock around the returning nobles,
the new light, just as they now do around the tyrant.
"Give me your hand once more, you true son of Ajax; for you, my friends, I have still many an interesting
piece of news untold.
"The chariot-race, as I have just related, was won by Cimon who gave the olive-branch to Pisistratus. Four
CHAPTER II. 24
finer horses than his I never saw. Arkesilaus of Cyrene, Kleosthenes of Epidamnus, Aster of Sybaris,
Hekataeus of Miletus and many more had also sent splendid teams. Indeed the games this time were more
than brilliant. All Hellas had sent deputies. Rhoda of the Ardeates, in distant Iberia, the wealthy Tartessus,
Sinope in the far East on the shores of Pontus, in short, every tribe that could boast of Hellenic descent was
well represented. The Sybarite deputies were of a dazzling beauty; the Spartans, homely and simple, but
handsome as Achilles, tall and strong as Hercules; the Athenians remarkable for their supple limbs and
graceful movements, and the men of Crotona were led by Milo, strongest of mortal birth. The Samian and
Milesian deputies vied in splendor and gorgeousness of attire with those from Corinth and Mitylene: the
flower of the Greek youth was assembled there, and, in the space allotted to spectators, were seated, not only
men of every age, class and nation, but many virgins, fair and lovely maidens, who had come to Olympia,
more especially from Sparta, in order to encourage the men during the games by their acclamations and
applause. The market was set up beyond the Alphaeus, and there traders from all parts of the world were to be
seen; Greeks, Carthaginians, Lydians, Phrygians and shrewd Phoenicians from Palestine settled weighty
business transactions, or offered their goods to the public from tents and booths. But how can I possibly
describe to you the surging throngs of the populace, the echoing choruses, the smoking festal hecatombs, the
bright and variegated costumes, the sumptuousness of the equipages, the clang of the different dialects and the
joyful cries of friends meeting again after years of separation; or the splendid appearance of the envoys, the
crowds of lookers-on and venders of small wares, the brilliant effect produced by the masses of spectators,
who filled to overflowing the space allotted to them, the eager suspense during the progress of the games, and
the never ending shouts of joy when the victory was decided; the solemn investiture with the olive-branch, cut
with a golden knife by the Elean boy, (whose parents must both be living), from the sacred tree in the Altis
planted so many centuries ago by Hercules himself; or lastly, the prolonged acclamations which, like peals of
thunder, resounded in the Stadium, when Milo of Crotona appeared, bearing on his shoulders the bronze
statue of himself cast by Dameas, and carried it through the Stadium into the Altis without once tottering. The
weight of the metal would have crushed a bull to the earth: but borne by Milo it seemed like a child in the
arms of its Lacedaemonian nurse.
"The highest honors (after Cimon's) were adjudged to a pair of Spartan brothers, Lysander and Maro, the sons
of Aristomachus. Maro was victor in the foot race, but Lysander presented himself, amidst the shouts of the
spectators, as the opponent of Milo! Milo the invincible, victor at Pisa, and in the Pythian and Isthmian
combats. Milo was taller and stouter than the Spartan, who was formed like Apollo, and seemed from his
great youth scarcely to have passed from under the hands of the schoolmaster.
"In their naked beauty, glistening with the golden oil, the youth and the man stood opposite to one another,
like a panther and a lion preparing for the combat. Before the onset, the young Lysander raised his hands
imploringly to the gods, crying: 'For my father, my honor, and the glory of Sparta!' The Crotonian looked
down on the youth with a smile of superiority; just as an epicure looks at the shell of the languste he is
preparing to open.
"And now the wrestling began. For some time neither could succeed in grasping the other. The Crotonian
threw almost irresistible weight into his attempts to lay hold of his opponent, but the latter slipped through the
iron grip like a snake. This struggle to gain a hold lasted long, and the immense multitude watched silently,
breathless from excitement. Not a sound was to be heard but the groans of the wrestlers and the singing of the
nightingales in the grove of the Altis. At last, the youth succeeded, by means of the cleverest trick I ever saw,
in clasping his opponent firmly. For a long time, Milo exerted all his strength to shake him oft, but in vain,
and the sand of the Stadium was freely moistened by the great drops of sweat, the result of this Herculean
struggle.
"More and more intense waxed the excitement of the spectators, deeper and deeper the silence, rarer the cries
of encouragement, and louder the groans of the wrestlers. At last Lysander's strength gave way. Immediately a
thousand voices burst forth to cheer him on. He roused himself and made one last superhuman effort to throw
his adversary: but it was too late. Milo had perceived the momentary weakness. Taking advantage of it, he
CHAPTER II. 25
clasped the youth in a deadly embrace; a full black stream of blood welled from Lysander's beautiful lips, and
he sank lifeless to the earth from the wearied arms of the giant. Democedes, the most celebrated physician of
our day, whom you Samians will have known at the court of Polycrates, hastened to the spot, but no skill
could now avail the happy Lysander,--he was dead.
"Milo was obliged to forego the victor's wreath"; and the fame of this youth will long continue to sound
through the whole of Greece.
[By the laws of the games the wrestler, whose adversary died, had no right to the prize of victory.]
I myself would rather be the dead Lysander, son of Aristomachus, than the living Kallias growing old in
inaction away from his country. Greece, represented by her best and bravest, carried the youth to his grave,
and his statue is to be placed in the Altis by those of Milo of Crotona and Praxidamas of AEgina". At length
the heralds proclaimed the sentence of the judges: 'To Sparta be awarded a victor's wreath for the dead, for the
noble Lysander hath been vanquished, not by Milo, but by Death, and he who could go forth unconquered
from a two hours' struggle with the strongest of all Greeks, hath well deserved the olive-branch.'"
Here Kallias stopped a moment in his narrative. During his animated description of these events, so precious
to every Greek heart, he had forgotten his listeners, and, gazing into vacancy, had seen only the figures of the
wrestlers as they rose before his remembrance. Now, on looking round, he perceived, to his astonishment, that
the grey-haired man with the wooden leg, whom he had already noticed, though without recognizing him, had
hidden his face in his hands and was weeping. Rhodopis was standing at his right hand. Phanes at his left, and
the other guests were gazing at the Spartan, as if he had been the hero of Kallias's tale. In a moment the quick
Athenian perceived that the aged man must stand in some very near relation to one or other of the victors at
Olympia; but when he heard that he was Aristomachus-the father of that glorious pair of brothers, whose
wondrous forms were constantly hovering before his eyes like visions sent down from the abodes of the gods,
then he too gazed on the sobbing old man with mingled envy and admiration, and made no effort to restrain
the tears which rushed into his own eyes, usually so clear and keen. In those days men wept, as well as
women, hoping to gain relief from the balm of their own tears. In wrath, in ecstasy of delight, in every deep
inward anguish, we find the mighty heroes weeping, while, on the other hand, the Spartan boys would submit
to be scourged at the altar of Artemis Orthia, and would bleed and even die under the lash without uttering a
moan, in order to obtain the praise of the men.
For a time every one remained silent, out of respect to the old man's emotion. But at last the stillness was
broken by Joshua the Jew, who began thus, in broken Greek:
"Weep thy fill, O man of Sparta! I also have known what it is to lose a son. Eleven years have passed since I
buried him in the land of strangers, by the waters of Babylon, where my people pined in captivity. Had yet
one year been added unto the life of the beautiful child, he had died in his own land, and had been buried in
the sepulchres of his fathers. But Cyrus the Persian (Jehovah bless his posterity!) released us from bondage
one year too late, and therefore do I weep doubly for this my son, in that he is buried among the enemies of
my people Israel. Can there be an evil greater than to behold our children, who are unto us as most precious
treasure, go down into the grave before us? And, may the Lord be gracious unto me, to lose so noble a son, in
the dawn of his early manhood, just at the moment he had won such brilliant renown, must indeed be a bitter
grief, a grief beyond all others!"
Then the Spartan took away his hands from before his face; he was looking stern, but smiled through his tears,
and answered:
"Phoenician, you err! I weep not for anguish, but for joy, and would have gladly lost my other son, if he could
have died like my Lysander."
CHAPTER II. 26
The Jew, horrified at these, to him, sinful and unnatural words, shook his head disapprovingly; but the Greeks
overwhelmed the old man with congratulations, deeming him much to be envied. His great happiness made
Aristomachus look younger by many years, and he cried to Rhodopis: "Truly, my friend, your house is for me
a house of blessing; for this is the second gift that the gods have allowed to fall to my lot, since I entered
it."--"What was the first?" asked Rhodopis. "A propitious oracle."--"But," cried Phanes, "you have forgotten
the third; on this day the gods have blessed you with the acquaintance of Rhodopis. But, tell me, what is this
about the oracle?"--"May I repeat it to our friends?" asked the Delphian.
Aristomachus nodded assent, and Phryxus read aloud a second time the answer of the Pythia:
"If once the warrior hosts from the snow-topped mountains descending Come to the fields of the stream
watering richly the plain, Then shall the lingering boat to the beckoning meadows convey thee Which to the
wandering foot peace and a home will afford. When those warriors come from the snow-topped mountains
descending Then will the powerful Five grant thee what they long refused."
Scarcely was the last word out of his mouth, when Kallias the Athenian, springing up, cried: "In this house,
too, you shall receive from me the fourth gift of the gods. Know that I have kept my rarest news till last: the
Persians are coming to Egypt!"
At this every one, except the Sybarite, rushed to his feet, and Kallias found it almost impossible to answer
their numerous questions. "Gently, gently, friends," he cried at last; "let me tell my story in order, or I shall
never finish it at all. It is not an army, as Phanes supposes, that is on its way hither, but a great embassy from
Cambyses, the present ruler of the most powerful kingdom of Persia. At Samos I heard that they had already
reached Miletus, and in a few days they will be here. Some of the king's own relations, are among the number,
the aged Croesus, king of Lydia, too; we shall behold a marvellous splendor and magnificence! Nobody
knows the object of their coming, but it is supposed that King Cambyses wishes to conclude an alliance with
Amasis; indeed some say the king solicits the hand of Pharaoh's daughter."
"An alliance?" asked Phanes, with an incredulous shrug of the shoulders. "Why the Persians are rulers over
half the world already. All the great Asiatic powers have submitted to their sceptre; Egypt and our own
mother- country, Hellas, are the only two that have been shared by the conqueror."
"You forget India with its wealth of gold, and the great migratory nations of Asia," answered Kallias. "And
you forget moreover, that an empire, composed like Persia of some seventy nations or tribes of different
languages and customs, bears the seeds of discord ever within itself, and must therefore guard against the
chance of foreign attack; lest, while the bulk of the army be absent, single provinces should seize the
opportunity and revolt from their allegiance. Ask the Milesians how long they would remain quiet if they
heard that their oppressors had been defeated in any battle?"
Theopompus, the Milesian merchant, called out, laughing at the same time: "If the Persians were to be
worsted in one war, they would at once be involved in a hundred others, and we should not be the last to rise
up against our tyrants in the hour of their weakness!"
"Whatever the intentions of the envoys may be," continued Kallias, "my information remains unaltered; they
will be here at the latest in three days."
"And so your oracle will be fulfilled, fortunate Aristomachus!" exclaimed Rhodopis, "for see, the warrior
hosts can only be the Persians. When they descend to the shores of the Nile, then the powerful Five,' your
Ephori, will change their decision, and you, the father of two Olympian victors, will be recalled to your native
land.
[The five Ephori of Sparta were appointed to represent the absent kings during the Messenian war. In later
CHAPTER II. 27
days the nobles made use of the Ephori as a power, which, springing immediately from their own body, they
could oppose to the kingly authority. Being the highest magistrates in all judicial and educational matters, and
in everything relating to the moral police of the country, the Ephori soon found means to assert their
superiority, and on most occasions over that of the kings themselves. Every patrician who was past the age of
thirty, had the right to become a candidate yearly for the office. Aristot. Potit, II. and IV. Laert. Diog. I. 68.]
"Fill the goblets again, Knakias. Let us devote this last cup to the manes of the glorious Lysander; and then I
advise you to depart, for it is long past midnight, and our pleasure has reached its highest point. The true host
puts an end to the banquet when his guests are feeling at their best. Serene and agreeable recollections will
soon bring you hither again; whereas there would be little joy in returning to a house where the remembrance
of hours of weakness, the result of pleasure, would mingle with your future enjoyment." In this her guests
agreed, and Ibykus named her a thorough disciple of Pythagoras, in praise of the joyous, festive evening.
Every one prepared for departure. The Sybarite, who had been drinking deeply in order to counteract the very
inconvenient amount of feeling excited by the conversation, rose also, assisted by his slaves, who had to be
called in for this purpose.
While he was being moved from his former comfortable position, he stammered something about a "breach of
hospitality;" but, when Rhodopis was about to give him her hand at parting, the wine gained the ascendancy
and he exclaimed, "By Hercules, Rhodopis, you get rid of us as if we were troublesome creditors. It is not my
custom to leave a supper so long as I can stand, still less to be turned out of doors like a miserable parasite!"
"Hear reason, you immoderate Sybarite," began Rhodopis, endeavoring with a smile to excuse her proceeding.
But these words, in Philoinus' half- intoxicated mood, only increased his irritation; he burst into a mocking
laugh, and staggering towards the door, shouted: "Immoderate Sybarite, you call me? good! here you have
your answer: Shameless slave! one can still perceive the traces of what you were in your youth. Farewell then,
slave of Iadmon and Xanthus, freedwoman of Charaxus!" He had not however finished his sentence, when
Aristomachus rushed upon him, stunned him with a blow of his fist, and carried him off like a child down to
the boat in which his slaves were waiting at the garden-gate.
ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:
Did the ancients know anything of love Folly to fret over what cannot be undone Go down into the grave
before us (Our children) He who kills a cat is punished (for murder) In those days men wept, as well as
women Lovers delighted in nature then as now Multitude who, like the gnats, fly towards every thing brilliant
Olympics--The first was fixed 776 B.C. Papyrus Ebers Pious axioms to be repeated by the physician, while
compounding Romantic love, as we know it, a result of Christianity True host puts an end to the banquet
Whether the historical romance is ever justifiable
AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS.
By Georg Ebers
Volume 2.
CHAPTER III.
The guests were all gone. Their departing mirth and joy had been smitten down by the drunkard's abusive
words, like fresh young corn beneath a hail storm. Rhodopis was left standing alone in the empty, brightly
decorated (supper-room). Knakias extinguished the colored lamps on the walls, and a dull, mysterious
half-light took the place of their brilliant rays, falling scantily and gloomily on the piled-up plates and dishes,
CHAPTER III. 28
the remnants of the meal, and the seats and cushions, pushed out of their places by the retiring guests. A cold
breeze came through the open door, for the dawn was at hand, and just before sunrise, the air is generally
unpleasantly cool in Egypt. A cold chill struck the limbs of the aged woman through her light garments. She
stood gazing tearlessly and fixedly into the desolate room, whose walls but a few minutes before had been
echoing with joy and gladness, and it seemed to her that the deserted guest-chamber must be like her own
heart. She felt as if a worm were gnawing there, and the warm blood congealing into ice.
Lost in these thoughts, she remained standing till at last her old female slave appeared to light her to her
sleeping apartment.
Silently Rhodopis allowed herself to be undressed, and then, as silently, lifted the curtain which separated a
second sleeping apartment from her own. In the middle of this second room stood a bedstead of maplewood,
and there, on white sheets spread over a mattress of fine sheep's wool, and protected from the cold by bright
blue coverlets's, lay a graceful, lovely girl asleep; this was Rhodopis' granddaughter, Sappho. The rounded
form and delicate figure seemed to denote one already in opening maidenhood, but the peaceful, blissful smile
could only belong to a harmless, happy child.
One hand lay under her head, hidden among the thick dark brown hair, the other clasped unconsciously a little
amulet of green stone, which hung round her neck. Over her closed eyes the long lashes trembled almost
imperceptibly, and a delicate pink flush came and went on the cheek of the slumberer. The finely-cut nostrils
rose and fell with her regular breathing, and she lay there, a picture of innocence, of peace, smiling in dreams,
and of the slumber that the gods bestow on early youth, when care has not yet come.
Softly and carefully, crossing the thick carpets on tiptoe, the grey- haired woman approached, looked with
unutterable tenderness into the smiling, childish face, and, kneeling down silently by the side of the bed,
buried her face in its soft coverings, so that the girl's hand just came in contact with her hair. Then she wept,
and without intermission; as though she hoped with this flood of tears to wash away not only her recent
humiliation, but with it all other sorrow from her mind.
At length she rose, breathed a light kiss on the sleeping girl's forehead, raised her hands in prayer towards
heaven, and returned to her own room, gently and carefully as she had come.
At her own bedside she found the old slave-woman, still waiting for her.
"What do you want so late, Melitta?" said Rhodopis, kindly, under her breath. "Go to bed; at your age it is not
good to remain up late, and you know that I do not require you any longer. Good night! and do not come
to-morrow until I send for you. I shall not be able to sleep much to-night, and shall be thankful if the morning
brings me a short repose."
The woman hesitated; it seemed that she had some thing on her mind which she feared to utter.
"There is something you want to ask me?" said Rhodopis.
Still the old slave hesitated.
"Speak!" said Rhodopis, "speak at once, and quickly."
"I saw you weeping," said the slave-woman, "you seem ill or sad; let me watch this night by your bedside.
Will you not tell me what ails you? You have often found that to tell a sorrow lightens the heart and lessens
the pain. Then tell me your grief to-day too; it will do you good, it will bring back peace to your mind."
"No," answered the other, "I cannot utter it." And then she continued, smiling bitterly: "I have once more
CHAPTER III. 29
experienced that no one, not even a god, has power to cancel the past of any human being, and that, in this
world, misfortune and disgrace are one and the same. Good night, leave me; Melitta!"
At noon on the following day, the same boat, which, the evening before, had carried the Athenian and the
Spartan, stopped once more before Rhodopis' garden.
The sun was shining so brightly, so warmly and genially in the dark blue Egyptian sky, the air was so pure
and light, the beetles were humming so merrily, the boatmen singing so lustily and happily, the shores of the
Nile bloomed in such gay, variegated beauty, and were so thickly peopled, the palm-trees, sycamores, bananas
and acacias were so luxuriant in foliage and blossom, and over the whole landscape the rarest and most
glorious gifts seemed to have been poured out with such divine munificence, that a passer-by must have
pronounced it the very home of joy and gladness, a place from which sadness and sorrow had been forever
banished.
How often we fancy, in passing a quiet village hidden among its orchards, that this at least must be the abode
of peace, and unambitious contentment! But alas! when we enter the cottages, what do we find? there, as
everywhere else, distress and need, passion and unsatisfied longing, fear and remorse, pain and misery; and by
the side of these, Ah! how few joys! Who would have imagined on coming to Egypt, that this luxuriant,
laughing sunny land, whose sky is always unclouded, could possibly produce and nourish men given to
bitterness and severity? that within the charming, hospitable house of the fortunate Rhodopis, covered and
surrounded, as it was, with sweet flowers, a heart could have been beating in the deepest sadness? And, still
more, who among all the guests of that honored, admired Thracian woman, would have believed that this sad
heart belonged to her? to the gracious, smiling matron, Rhodopis herself?
She was sitting with Phanes in a shady arbor near the cooling spray of a fountain. One could see that she had
been weeping again, but her face was beautiful and kind as ever. The Athenian was holding her hand and
trying to comfort her.
Rhodopis listened patiently, and smiled the while; at times her smile was bitter, at others it gave assent to his
words. At last however she interrupted her well-intentioned friend, by saying:
"Phanes, I thank you. Sooner or later this last disgrace must be forgotten too. Time is clever in the healing art.
If I were weak I should leave Naukratis and live in retirement for my grandchild alone; a whole world, believe
me, lies slumbering in that young creature. Many and many a time already I have longed to leave Egypt, and
as often have conquered the wish. Not because I cannot live without the homage of your sex; of that I have
already had more than enough in my life, but because I feel that I, the slave-girl and the despised woman
once, am now useful, necessary, almost indispensable indeed, to many free and noble men. Accustomed as I
am, to an extended sphere of work, in its nature resembling a man's, I could not content myself in living for
one being alone, however dear. I should dry up like a plant removed from a rich soil into the desert, and
should leave my grandchild desolate indeed, three times orphaned, and alone in the world. No! I shall remain
in Egypt.
"Now that you are leaving, I shall be really indispensable to our friends here. Amasis is old; when Psamtik
comes to the throne we shall have infinitely greater difficulties to contend with than heretofore. I must remain
and fight on in the fore-front of our battle for the freedom and welfare of the Hellenic race. Let them call my
efforts unwomanly if they will. This is, and shall be, the purpose of my life, a purpose to which I will remain
all the more faithful, because it is one of those to which a woman rarely dares devote her life. During this last
night of tears I have felt that much, very much of that womanly weakness still lingers in me which forms at
once the happiness and misery of our sex. To preserve this feminine weakness in my granddaughter, united
with perfect womanly delicacy, has been my first duty; my second to free myself entirely from it. But a war
against one's own nature cannot be carried on without occasional defeat, even if ultimately successful. When
grief and pain are gaining the upperhand and I am well nigh in despair, my only help lies in remembering my
CHAPTER III. 30
friend Pythagoras, that noblest among men, and his words: 'Observe a due proportion in all things, avoid
excessive joy as well as complaining grief, and seek to keep thy soul in tune and harmony like a well-toned
harp.'"
[There is no question that Pythagoras visited Egypt during the reign of Amasis, probably towards the middle
of the 6th century (according to our reckoning, about 536 B. C.) Herod. II. 81-123. Diod. I. 98. Rich
information about Pythagoras is to be found in the works of the very learned scholar Roeth, who is however
occasionally much too bold in his conjectures. Pythagoras was the first among Greek thinkers (speculators).
He would not take the name of a wise man or "sage," but called himself "Philosophos," or a "friend of
wisdom."]
"This Pythagorean inward peace, this deep, untroubled calm, I see daily before me in my Sappho; and struggle
to attain it myself, though many a stroke of fate untunes the chords of my poor heart. I am calm now! You
would hardly believe what power the mere thought of that first of all thinkers, that calm, deliberate man,
whose life acted on mine like sweet, soft music, has over me. You knew him, you can understand what I
mean. Now, mention your wish; my heart is as calmly quiet as the Nile waters which are flowing by so
quietly, and I am ready to hear it, be it good or evil."
"I am glad to see you thus," said the Athenian. "If you had remembered the noble friend of wisdom, as
Pythagoras was wont to call himself a little sooner, your soul would have regained its balance yesterday. The
master enjoins us to look back every evening on the events, feelings and actions of the day just past.
"Now had you done this, you would have felt that the unfeigned admiration of all your guests, among whom
were men of distinguished merit, outweighed a thousandfold the injurious words of a drunken libertine; you
would have felt too that you were a friend of the gods, for was it not in your house that the immortals gave
that noble old man at last, after his long years of misfortune, the greatest joy that can fall to the lot of any
human being? and did they not take from you one friend only in order to replace him in the same moment, by
another and a better? Come, I will hear no contradiction. Now for my request.
"You know that people sometimes call me an Athenian, sometimes a Halikarnassian. Now, as the Ionian,
AEolian and Dorian mercenaries have never been on good terms with the Karians, my almost triple descent (if
I may call it so) has proved very useful to me as commander of both these divisions. Well qualified as
Aristomachus may be for the command, yet in this one point Amasis will miss me; for I found it an easy
matter to settle the differences among the troops and keep them at peace, while he, as a Spartan, will find it
very difficult to keep right with the Karian soldiers.
"This double nationality of mine arises from the fact that my father married a Halikarnassian wife out of a
noble Dorian family, and, at the time of my birth, was staying with her in Halikarnassus, having come thither
in order to take possession of her parental inheritance. So, though I was taken back to Athens before I was
three months old, I must still be called a Karian, as a man's native land is decided by his birthplace.
"In Athens, as a young nobleman, belonging to that most aristocratic and ancient family, the Philaidae, I was
reared and educated in all the pride of an Attic noble. Pisistratus, brave and clever, and though of equal, yet by
no means of higher birth, than ourselves, for there exists no family more aristocratic than my father's, gained
possession of the supreme authority. Twice, the nobles, by uniting all their strength, succeeded in
overthrowing him, and when, the third time, assisted by Lygdamis of Naxos, the Argives and Eretrians, he
attempted to return, we opposed him again. We had encamped by the temple of Minerva at Pallene, and were
engaged in sacrificing to the goddess, early, before our first meal, when we were suddenly surprised by the
clever tyrant, who gained an easy, bloodless victory over our unarmed troops. As half of the entire army
opposed to the tyrant was under my command, I determined rather to die than yield, fought with my whole
strength, implored the soldiers to remain steadfast, resisted without yielding a point, but fell at last with a
spear in my shoulder.
CHAPTER III. 31
"The Pisistratidae became lords of Athens. I fled to Halikarnassus, my second home, accompanied by my wife
and children. There, my name being known through some daring military exploits, and, through my having
once conquered in the Pythian games, I was appointed to a command in the mercenary troops of the King of
Egypt; accompanied the expedition to Cyprus, shared with Aristomachus the renown of having conquered the
birthplace of Aphrodite for Amasis, and finally was named commander-in- chief of all the mercenaries in
Egypt.
"Last summer my wife died; our children, a boy of eleven and a girl of ten years, remained with an aunt in
Halikarnassus. But she too has followed to the inexorable Hades, and so, only a few days ago I sent for the
little ones here. They cannot, however, possibly reach Naukratis in less than three weeks, and yet they will
already have set out on their journey before a letter to countermand my first order could reach them.
"I must leave Egypt in fourteen days, and cannot therefore receive them myself.
"My own intentions are to go to the Thracian Chersonese, where my uncle, as you know, has been called to
fill a high office among the Dolonki. The children shall follow me thither; my faithful old slave Korax will
remain in Naukratis on purpose to bring them to me.
"Now, if you will show to me that you are in deed and truth my friend, will you receive the little ones and take
care of them till the next ship sails for Thrace? But above all, will you carefully conceal them from the eyes of
the crown-prince's spies? You know that Psamtik hates me mortally, and he could easily revenge himself on
the father through the children. I ask you for this great favor, first, because I know your kindness by
experience; and secondly, because your house has been made secure by the king's letter of guarantee, and they
will therefore be safe here from the inquiries of the police; notwithstanding that, by the laws of this most
formal country, all strangers, children not excepted, must give up their names to the officer of the district.
"You can now judge of the depth of my esteem, Rhodopis; I am committing into your hands all that makes life
precious to me; for even my native land has ceased to be dear while she submits so ignominiously to her
tyrants. Will you then restore tranquillity to an anxious father's heart, will you--?"
"I will, Phanes, I will!" cried the aged woman in undisguised delight. "You are not asking me for any thing,
you are presenting me with a gift. Oh, how I look forward already to their arrival! And how glad Sappho will
be, when the little creatures come and enliven her solitude! But this I can assure you, Phanes, I shall not let
my little guests depart with the first Thracian ship. You can surely afford to be separated from them one short
half-year longer, and I promise you they shall receive the best lessons, and be guided to all that is good and
beautiful."
"On that head I have no fear," answered Phanes, with a thankful smile. "But still you must send off the two
little plagues by the first ship; my anxiety as to Psamtik's revenge is only too well grounded. Take my most
heartfelt thanks beforehand for all the love and kindness which you will show to my children. I too hope and
believe, that the merry little creatures will be an amusement and pleasure to Sappho in her lonely life."
"And more," interrupted Rhodopis looking down; "this proof of confidence repays a thousand-fold the
disgrace inflicted on me last night in a moment of intoxication.--But here comes Sappho!"
CHAPTER IV.
Five days after the evening we have just described at Rhodopis' house, an immense multitude was to be seen
assembled at the harbor of Sais.
Egyptians of both sexes, and of every age and class were thronging to the water's edge.
CHAPTER IV. 32
Soldiers and merchants, whose various ranks in society were betokened by the length of their white garments,
bordered with colored fringes, were interspersed among the crowd of half-naked, sinewy men, whose only
clothing consisted of an apron, the costume of the lower classes. Naked children crowded, pushed and fought
to get the best places. Mothers in short cloaks were holding their little ones up to see the sight, which by this
means they entirely lost themselves; and a troop of dogs and cats were playing and fighting at the feet of these
eager sight-seers, who took the greatest pains not to tread on, or in any way injure the sacred animals.
[According to various pictures on the Egyptian monuments. The mothers are from Wilkinson III. 363. Isis and
Hathor, with the child Horus in her lap or at her breast, are found in a thousand representations, dating both
from more modern times and in the Greek style. The latter seem to have served as a model for the earliest
pictures of the Madonna holding the infant Christ.]
The police kept order among this huge crowd with long staves, on the metal heads of which the king's name
was inscribed. Their care was especially needed to prevent any of the people from being pushed into the
swollen Nile, an arm of which, in the season of the inundations, washes the walls of Sais.
On the broad flight of steps which led between two rows of sphinxes down to the landing-place of the royal
boats, was a very different kind of assembly.
The priests of the highest rank were seated there on stone benches. Many wore long, white robes, others were
clad in aprons, broad jewelled collars, and garments of panther skins. Some had fillets adorned with plumes
that waved around brows, temples, and the stiff structures of false curls that floated over their shoulders;
others displayed the glistening bareness of their smoothly-shaven skulls. The supreme judge was
distinguished by the possession of the longest and handsomest plume in his head-dress, and a costly sapphire
amulet, which, suspended by a gold chain, hung on his breast.
The highest officers of the Egyptian army wore uniforms of gay colors,97 and carried short swords in their
girdles. On the right side of the steps a division of the body-guard was stationed, armed with battleaxes,
daggers, bows, and large shields; on the left, were the Greek mercenaries, armed in Ionian fashion. Their new
leader, our friend Aristomachus, stood with a few of his own officers apart from the Egyptians, by the colossal
statues of Psamtik I., which had been erected on the space above the steps, their faces towards the river.
In front of these statues, on a silver chair, sat Psamtik, the heir to the throne: He wore a close-fitting garment
of many colors, interwoven with gold, and was surrounded by the most distinguished among the king's
courtiers, chamberlains, counsellors, and friends, all bearing staves with ostrich feathers and lotus-flowers.
The multitude gave vent to their impatience by shouting, singing, and quarrelling; but the priests and
magnates on the steps preserved a dignified and solemn silence. Each, with his steady, unmoved gaze, his
stiffly-curled false wig and beard, and his solemn, deliberate manner, resembled the two huge statues, which,
the one precisely similar to the other, stood also motionless in their respective places, gazing calmly into the
stream.
At last silken sails, chequered with purple and blue, appeared in sight.
The crowd shouted with delight. Cries of, "They are coming! Here they are!" "Take care, or you'll tread on
that kitten," "Nurse, hold the child higher that she may see something of the sight." "You are pushing me into
the water, Sebak!" "Have a care Phoenician, the boys are throwing burs into your long beard." "Now, now,
you Greek fellow, don't fancy that all Egypt belongs to you, because Amasis allows you to live on the shores
of the sacred river!" "Shameless set, these Greeks, down with them!" shouted a priest, and the cry was at once
echoed from many mouths. "Down with the eaters of swine's flesh and despisers of the gods!"
[The Egyptians, like the Jews, were forbidden to eat swine's flesh. This prohibition is mentioned in the Ritual
CHAPTER IV. 33
of the Dead, found in a grave in Abd-el-Qurnah, and also in other places. Porphyr. de Abstin. IV. The swine
was considered an especially unclean animal pertaining to Typhon (Egyptian, Set) as the boar to Ares, and
swineherds were an especially despised race. Animals with bristles were only sacrificed at the feasts of Osiris
and Eileithyia. Herod. I. 2. 47. It is probable that Moses borrowed his prohibition of swine's flesh from the
Egyptian laws with regard to unclean animals.]
From words they were proceeding to deeds, but the police were not to be trifled with, and by a vigorous use of
their staves, the tumult was soon stilled. The large, gay sails, easily to be distinguished among the brown,
white and blue ones of the smaller Nile-boats which swarmed around them, came nearer and nearer to the
expectant throng. Then at last the crown-prince and the dignitaries arose from their seats. The royal band of
trumpeters blew a shrill and piercing blast of welcome, and the first of the expected boats stopped at the
landing-place.
It was a rather long, richly-gilded vessel, and bore a silver sparrow- hawk as figure-head. In its midst rose a
golden canopy with a purple covering, beneath which cushions were conveniently arranged. On each deck in
the forepart of the ship sat twelve rowers, their aprons attached by costly fastenings.
[Splendid Nile-boats were possessed, in greater or less numbers, by all the men of high rank. Even in the tomb
of Ti at Sakkara, which dates from the time of the Pyramids, we meet with a chief overseer of the vessels
belonging to a wealthy Egyptian.]
Beneath the canopy lay six fine-looking men in glorious apparel; and before the ship had touched the shore
the youngest of these, a beautiful fair-haired youth, sprang on to the steps.
Many an Egyptian girl's mouth uttered a lengthened "Ah" at this glorious sight, and even the grave faces of
some of the dignitaries brightened into a friendly smile.
The name of this much-admired youth was Bartja.
[This Bartja is better known under the name of Smerdis, but on what account the Greeks gave him this name
is not clear. In the cuneiform inscriptions of Bisitun or Behistun, he is called Bartja, or, according to Spiegel,
Bardiya. We have chosen, for the sake of the easy pronunciation, the former, which is Rawlinson's simplified
reading of the name.]
He was the son of the late, and brother of the reigning king of Persia, and had been endowed by nature with
every gift that a youth of twenty years could desire for himself.
Around his tiara was wound a blue and white turban, beneath which hung fair, golden curls of beautiful,
abundant hair; his blue eyes sparkled with life and joy, kindness and high spirits, almost with sauciness; his
noble features, around which the down of a manly beard was already visible, were worthy of a Grecian
sculptor's chisel, and his slender but muscular figure told of strength and activity. The splendor of his apparel
was proportioned to his personal beauty. A brilliant star of diamonds and turquoises glittered in the front of
his tiara. An upper garment of rich white and gold brocade reaching just below the knees, was fastened round
the waist with a girdle of blue and white, the royal colors of Persia. In this girdle gleamed a short, golden
sword, its hilt and scabbard thickly studded with opals and sky-blue turquoises. The trousers were of the same
rich material as the robe, fitting closely at the ankle, and ending within a pair of short boots of light-blue
leather.
The long, wide sleeves of his robe displayed a pair of vigorous arms, adorned with many costly bracelets of
gold and jewels; round his slender neck and on his broad chest lay a golden chain.
Such was the youth who first sprang on shore. He was followed by Darius, the son of Hystaspes, a young
CHAPTER IV. 34
Persian of the blood royal, similar in person to Bartja, and scarcely less gorgeously apparelled than he. The
third to disembark was an aged man with snow-white hair, in whose face the gentle and kind expression of
childhood was united, with the intellect of a man, and the experience of old age. His dress consisted of a long
purple robe with sleeves, and the yellow boots worn by the Lydians;--his whole appearance produced an
impression of the greatest modesty and a total absence of pretension.
[On account of these boots, which are constantly mentioned, Croesus was named by the oracle "soft-footed."]
Yet this simple old man had been, but a few years before, the most envied of his race and age; and even in our
day at two thousand years' interval, his name is used as a synonyme for the highest point of worldly riches
attainable by mankind. The old man to whom we are now introduced is no other than Croesus, the dethroned
king of Lydia, who was then living at the court of Cambyses, as his friend and counsellor, and had
accompanied the young Bartja to Egypt, in the capacity of Mentor.
Croesus was followed by Prexaspes, the king's Ambassador, Zopyrus, the son of Megabyzus, a Persian noble,
the friend of Bartja and Darius; and, lastly, by his own son, the slender, pale Gyges, who after having become
dumb in his fourth year through the fearful anguish he had suffered on his father's account at the taking of
Sardis, had now recovered the power of speech.
Psamtik descended the steps to welcome the strangers. His austere, sallow face endeavored to assume a smile.
The high officials in his train bowed down nearly to the ground, allowing their arms to hang loosely at their
sides. The Persians, crossing their hands on their breasts, cast themselves on the earth before the heir to the
Egyptian throne. When the first formalities were over, Bartja, according to the custom of his native country,
but greatly to the astonishment of the populace, who were totally unaccustomed to such a sight, kissed the
sallow cheek of the Egyptian prince; who shuddered at the touch of a stranger's unclean lips, then took his
way to the litters waiting to convey him and his escort to the dwelling designed for them by the king, in the
palace at Sais.
A portion of the crowd streamed after the strangers, but the larger number remained at their places, knowing
that many a new and wonderful sight yet awaited them.
"Are you going to run after those dressed-up monkeys and children of Typhon, too?" asked an angry priest of
his neighbor, a respectable tailor of Sais. "I tell you, Puhor, and the high-priest says so too, that these strangers
can bring no good to the black land! I am for the good old times, when no one who cared for his life dared set
foot on Egyptian soil. Now our streets are literally swarming with cheating Hebrews, and above all with those
insolent Greeks whom may the gods destroy!
[The Jews were called Hebrews (Apuriu) by the Egyptians; as brought to light by Chabas. See Ebers,
Aegypten I. p. 316. H. Brugsch opposes this opinion.]
"Only look, there is the third boat full of strangers! And do you know what kind of people these Persians are?
The high-priest says that in the whole of their kingdom, which is as large as half the world, there is not a
single temple to the gods; and that instead of giving decent burial to the dead, they leave them to be torn in
pieces by dogs and vultures."
[These statements are correct, as the Persians, at the time of the dynasty of the Achaemenidae, had no temples,
but used fire-altars and exposed their dead to the dogs and vultures. An impure corpse was not permitted to
defile the pure earth by its decay; nor might it be committed to the fire or water for destruction, as their purity
would be equally polluted by such an act. But as it was impossible to cause the dead bodies to vanish,
Dakhmas or burying- places were laid out, which had to be covered with pavement and cement not less than
four inches thick, and surrounded by cords to denote that the whole structure was as it were suspended in the
air, and did not come in contact with the pure earth. Spiegel, Avesta II.]
CHAPTER IV. 35
"The tailor's indignation at hearing this was even greater than his astonishment, and pointing to the
landing-steps, he cried:
"It is really too bad; see, there is the sixth boat full of these foreigners!"
"Yes, it is hard indeed!" sighed the priest, "one might fancy a whole army arriving. Amasis will go on in this
manner until the strangers drive him from his throne and country, and plunder and make slaves of us poor
creatures, as the evil Hyksos, those scourges of Egypt, and the black Ethiopians did, in the days of old."
"The seventh boat!" shouted the tailor.
"May my protectress Neith, the great goddess of Sais, destroy me, if I can understand the king," complained
the priest. "He sent three barks to Naukratis, that poisonous nest hated of the gods, to fetch the servants and
baggage of these Persians; but instead of three, eight had to be procured, for these despisers of the gods and
profaners of dead bodies have not only brought kitchen utensils, dogs, horses, carriages, chests, baskets and
bales, but have dragged with them, thousands of miles, a whole host of servants. They tell me that some of
them have no other work than twining of garlands and preparing ointments. Their priests too, whom they call
Magi, are here with them. I should like to know what they are for? of what use is a priest where there is no
temple?"
The old King Amasis received the Persian embassy shortly after their arrival with all the amiability and
kindness peculiar to him.
Four days later, after having attended to the affairs of state, a duty punctually fulfilled by him every morning
without exception, he went forth to walk with Croesus in the royal gardens. The remaining members of the
embassy, accompanied by the crown-prince, were engaged in an excursion up the Nile to the city of Memphis.
The palace-gardens, of a royal magnificence, yet similar in their arrangement to those of Rhodopis, lay in the
north-west part of Sais, near the royal citadel.
Here, under the shadow of a spreading plane-tree, and near a gigantic basin of red granite, into which an
abundance of clear water flowed perpetually through the jaws of black basalt crocodiles, the two old men
seated themselves.
The dethroned king, though in reality some years the elder of the two, looked far fresher and more vigorous
than the powerful monarch at his side. Amasis was tall, but his neck was bent; his corpulent body was
supported by weak and slender legs: and his face, though well-formed, was lined and furrowed. But a
vigorous spirit sparkled in the small, flashing eyes, and an expression of raillery, sly banter, and at times, even
of irony, played around his remarkably full lips. The low, broad brow, the large and beautifully-arched head
bespoke great mental power, and in the changing color of his eyes one seemed to read that neither wit nor
passion were wanting in the man, who, from his simple place as soldier in the ranks, had worked his way up to
the throne of the Pharaohs. His voice was sharp and hard, and his movements, in comparison with the
deliberation of the other members of the Egyptian court, appeared almost morbidly active.
The attitude and bearing of his neighbor Croesus were graceful, and in every way worthy of a king. His whole
manner showed that he had lived in frequent intercourse with the highest and noblest minds of Greece. Thales,
Anaximander and Anaximenes of Miletus, Bias of Priene, Solon of Athens, Pittakus of Lesbos, the most
celebrated Hellenic philosophers, had in former and happier days been guests at the court of Croesus in
Sardis. His full clear voice sounded like pure song when compared with the shrill tones of Amasis.
[Bias, a philosopher of Ionian origin, flourished about 560 B. C. and was especially celebrated for his wise
maxims on morals and law. After his death, which took place during his defence of a friend in the public
CHAPTER IV. 36
court, a temple was erected to him by his countrymen. Laert. Diog. I. 88.]
"Now tell me openly," began king Pharaoh--[In English "great house," the high gate or "sublime porte.']--in
tolerably fluent Greek, "what opinion hast thou formed of Egypt? Thy judgment possesses for me more worth
than that of any other man, for three reasons: thou art better acquainted with most of the countries and nations
of this earth; the gods have not only allowed thee to ascend the ladder of fortune to its utmost summit, but also
to descend it, and thirdly, thou hast long been the first counsellor to the mightiest of kings. Would that my
kingdom might please thee so well that thou wouldst remain here and become to me a brother. Verily,
Croesus, my friend hast thou long been, though my eyes beheld thee yesterday for the first time!"
"And thou mine," interrupted the Lydian. "I admire the courage with which thou hast accomplished that which
seemed right and good in thine eyes, in spite of opposition near and around thee. I am thankful for the favor
shown to the Hellenes, my friends, and I regard thee as related to me by fortune, for hast thou not also passed
through all the extremes of good and evil that this life can offer?"
"With this difference," said Amasis smiling, "that we started from opposite points; in thy lot the good came
first, the evil later; whereas in my own this order has been reversed. In saying this, however," he added, "I am
supposing that my present fortune is a good for me, and that I enjoy it."
"And I, in that case," answered Croesus, "must be assuming that I am unhappy in what men call my present
ill-fortune."
"How can it possibly be otherwise after the loss of such enormous possessions?"
"Does happiness consist then in possession?" asked Croesus. "Is happiness itself a thing to be possessed? Nay,
by no means! It is nothing but a feeling, a sensation, which the envious gods vouchsafe more often to the
needy than to the mighty. The clear sight of the latter becomes dazzled by the glittering treasure, and they
cannot but suffer continual humiliation, because, conscious of possessing power to obtain much, they wage an
eager war for all, and therein are continually defeated."
Amasis sighed, and answered: "I would I could prove thee in the wrong; but in looking back on my past life I
am fain to confess that its cares began with that very hour which brought me what men call my good
fortune."--"And I," interrupted Croesus, "can assure thee that I am thankful thou delayedst to come to my
help, inasmuch as the hour of my overthrow was the beginning of true, unsullied happiness. When I beheld
the first Persians scale the walls of Sardis, I execrated myself and the gods, life appeared odious to me,
existence a curse. Fighting on, but in heart despairing, I and my people were forced to yield. A Persian raised
his sword to cleave my skull--in an instant my poor dumb son had thrown himself between his father and the
murderer, and for the first time after long years of silence, I heard him speak. Terror had loosened his tongue;
in that dreadful hour Gyges learnt once more to speak, and I, who but the moment before had been cursing the
gods, bowed down before their power. I had commanded a slave to kill me the moment I should be taken
prisoner by the Persians, but now I deprived him of his sword. I was a changed man, and by degrees learnt
ever more and more to subdue the rage and indignation which yet from time to time would boil up again
within my soul, rebellious against my fate and my noble enemies. Thou knowest that at last I became the
friend of Cyrus, and that my son grew up at his court, a free man at my side, having entirely regained the use
of his speech. Everything beautiful and good that I had heard, seen or thought during my long life I treasured
up now for him; he was my kingdom, my crown, my treasure. Cyrus's days of care, his nights so reft of sleep,
reminded me with horror of my own former greatness, and from day to day it became more evident to me that
happiness has nothing to do with our outward circumstances. Each man possesses the hidden germ in his own
heart. A contented, patient mind, rejoicing much in all that is great and beautiful and yet despising not the day
of small things; bearing sorrow without a murmur and sweetening it by calling to remembrance former joy;
moderation in all things; a firm trust in the favor of the gods and a conviction that, all things being subject to
change, so with us too the worst must pass in due season; all this helps to mature the germ of happiness, and
CHAPTER IV. 37
gives us power to smile, where the man undisciplined by fate might yield to despair and fear."
Amasis listened attentively, drawing figures the while in the sand with the golden flower on his staff. At last
he spoke:
"Verily, Croesus, I the great god, the 'sun of righteousness,' 'the son of Neith,' 'the lord of warlike glory,' as the
Egyptians call me, am tempted to envy thee, dethroned and plundered as thou art. I have been as happy as
thou art now. Once I was known through all Egypt, though only the poor son of a captain, for my light heart,
happy temper, fun and high spirits. The common soldiers would do anything for me, my superior officers
could have found much fault, but in the mad Amasis, as they called me, all was overlooked, and among my
equals, (the other under- officers) there could be no fun or merry-making unless I took a share in it. My
predecessor king Hophra sent us against Cyrene. Seized with thirst in the desert, we refused to go on; and a
suspicion that the king intended to sacrifice us to the Greek mercenaries drove the army to open mutiny. In my
usual joking manner I called out to my friends: 'You can never get on without a king, take me for your ruler; a
merrier you will never find!' The soldiers caught the words. 'Amasis will be our king,' ran through the ranks
from man to man, and, in a few hours more, they came to me with shouts, and acclamations of 'The good,
jovial Amasis for our King!' One of my boon companions set a field-marshal's helmet on my head: I made the
joke earnest, and we defeated Hophra at Momempliis. The people joined in the conspiracy, I ascended the
throne, and men pronounced me fortunate. Up to that time I had been every Egyptian's friend, and now I was
the enemy of the best men in the nation.
"The priests swore allegiance to me, and accepted me as a member of their caste, but only in the hope of
guiding me at their will. My former superiors in command either envied me, or wished to remain on the same
terms of intercourse as formerly. But this would have been inconsistent with my new position, and have
undermined my authority. One day, therefore, when the officers of the host were at one of my banquets and
attempting, as usual, to maintain their old convivial footing, I showed them the golden basin in which their
feet had been washed before sitting down to meat; five days later, as they were again drinking at one of my
revels, I caused a golden image of the great god Ra be placed upon the richly-ornamented banqueting-table.
[Ra, with the masculine article Phra, must be regarded as the central point of the sun-worship of the
Egyptians, which we consider to have been the foundation of their entire religion. He was more especially
worshipped at Heliopolis. Plato, Eudoxus, and probably Pythagoras also, profited by the teaching of his
priests. The obelisks, serving also as memorial monuments on which the names and deeds of great kings were
recorded, were sacred to him, and Pliny remarks of them that they represented the rays of the sun. He was
regarded as the god of light, the director of the entire visible creation, over which he reigned, as Osiris over
the world of spirits.]
"On perceiving it, they fell down to worship. As they rose from their knees, I took the sceptre, and holding it
up on high with much solemnity, exclaimed: 'In five days an artificer has transformed the despised vessel into
which ye spat and in which men washed your feet, into this divine image. Such a vessel was I, but the Deity,
which can fashion better and more quickly than a goldsmith, has made me your king. Bow down then before
me and worship. He who henceforth refuses to obey, or is unmindful of the reverence due to the king, is guilty
of death!'
"They fell down before me, every one, and I saved my authority, but lost my friends. As I now stood in need
of some other prop, I fixed on the Hellenes, knowing that in all military qualifications one Greek is worth
more than five Egyptians, and that with this assistance I should be able to carry out those measures which I
thought beneficial.
"I kept the Greek mercenaries always round me, I learnt their language, and it was they who brought to me the
noblest human being I ever met, Pythagoras. I endeavored to introduce Greek art and manners among
ourselves, seeing what folly lay in a self-willed adherence to that which has been handed down to us, when it
CHAPTER IV. 38
is in itself bad and unworthy, while the good seed lay on our Egyptian soil, only waiting to be sown.
"I portioned out the whole land to suit my purposes, appointed the best police in the world, and accomplished
much; but my highest aim, namely: to infuse into this country, at once so gay and so gloomy, the spirit and
intellect of the Greeks, their sense of beauty in form, their love of life and joy in it, this all was shivered on the
same rock which threatens me with overthrow and ruin whenever I attempt to accomplish anything new. The
priests are my opponents, my masters, they hang like a dead weight upon me. Clinging with superstitious awe
to all that is old and traditionary, abominating everything foreign, and regarding every stranger as the natural
enemy of their authority and their teaching, they can lead the most devout and religious of all nations with a
power that has scarcely any limits. For this I am forced to sacrifice all my plans, for this I see my life passing
away in bondage to their severe ordinances, this will rob my death-bed of peace, and I cannot be secure that
this host of proud mediators between god and man will allow me to rest even in my grave!"
"By Zeus our saviour, with all thy good fortune, thou art to be pitied!" interrupted Croesus sympathetically, "I
understand thy misery; for though I have met with many an individual who passed through life darkly and
gloomily, I could not have believed that an entire race of human beings existed, to whom a gloomy, sullen
heart was as natural as a poisonous tooth to the serpent. Yet it is true, that on my journey hither and during my
residence at this court I have seen none but morose and gloomy countenances among the priesthood. Even the
youths, thy immediate attendants, are never seen to smile; though cheerfulness, that sweet gift of the gods,
usually belongs to the young, as flowers to spring."
"Thou errest," answered Amasis, "in believing this gloom to be a universal characteristic of the Egyptians. It
is true that our religion requires much serious thought. There are few nations, however, who have so largely
the gift of bantering fun and joke: or who on the occasion of a festival, can so entirely forget themselves and
everything else but the enjoyments of the moment; but the very sight of a stranger is odious to the priests, and
the moroseness which thou observest is intended as retaliation on me for my alliance with the strangers. Those
very boys, of whom thou spakest, are the greatest torment of my life. They perform for me the service of
slaves, and obey my slightest nod. One might imagine that the parents who devote their children to this
service, and who are the highest in rank among the priesthood, would be the most obedient and reverential
servants of the king whom they profess to honor as divine; but believe me, Croesus, just in this very act of
devotion, which no ruler can refuse to accept without giving offence, lies the most crafty, scandalous
calculation. Each of these youths is my keeper, my spy. They watch my smallest actions and report them at
once to the priests."
"But how canst thou endure such an existence? Why not banish these spies and select servants from the
military caste, for instance? They would be quite as useful as the priests."
"Ah! if I only could, if I dared!" exclaimed Amasis loudly. And then, as if frightened at his own rashness, he
continued in a low voice, "I believe that even here I am being watched. To-morrow I will have that grove of
fig-trees yonder uprooted. The young priest there, who seems so fond of gardening, has other fruit in his mind
besides the half-ripe figs that he is so slowly dropping into his basket. While his hand is plucking the figs, his
ear gathers the words that fall from the mouth of his king."
"But, by our father Zeus, and by Apollo--"
"Yes, I understand thy indignation and I share it; but every position has its duties, and as a king of a people
who venerate tradition as the highest divinity, I must submit, at least in the main, to the ceremonies handed
down through thousands of years. Were I to burst these fetters, I know positively that at my death my body
would remain unburied; for, know that the priests sit in judgment over every corpse, and deprive the
condemned of rest, even in the grave."
[This well-known custom among the ancient Egyptians is confirmed, not only by many Greek narrators, but
CHAPTER IV. 39
by the laboriously erased inscriptions discovered in the chambers of some tombs.]
"Why care about the grave?" cried Croesus, becoming angry. "We live for life, not for death!"
"Say rather," answered Amasis rising from his seat, "we, with our Greek minds, believe a beautiful life to be
the highest good. But Croesus, I was begotten and nursed by Egyptian parents, nourished on Egyptian food,
and though I have accepted much that is Greek, am still, in my innermost being, an Egyptian. What has been
sung to us in our childhood, and praised as sacred in our youth, lingers on in the heart until the day which sees
us embalmed as mummies. I am an old man and have but a short span yet to run, before I reach the landmark
which separates us from that farther country. For the sake of life's few remaining days, shall I willingly mar
Death's thousands of years? No, my friend, in this point at least I have remained an Egyptian, in believing,
like the rest of my countrymen, that the happiness of a future life in the kingdom of Osiris, depends on the
preservation of my body, the habitation of the soul.
[Each human soul was considered as a part of the world-soul Osiris, was united to him after the death of the
body, and thenceforth took the name of Osiris. The Egyptian Cosmos consisted of the three great realms, the
Heavens, the Earth and the Depths. Over the vast ocean which girdles the vault of heaven, the sun moves in a
boat or car drawn by the planets and fixed stars. On this ocean too the great constellations circle in their ships,
and there is the kingdom of the blissful gods, who sit enthroned above this heavenly ocean under a canopy of
stars. The mouth of this great stream is in the East, where the sun-god rises from the mists and is born again as
a child every morning. The surface of the earth is inhabited by human beings having a share in the three great
cosmic kingdoms. They receive their soul from the heights of heaven, the seat and source of light; their
material body is of the earth; and the appearance or outward form by which one human being is distinguished
from another at sight--his phantom or shadow--belongs to the depths. At death, soul, body, and shadow
separate from one another. The soul to return to the place from whence it came, to Heaven, for it is a part of
God (of Osiris); the body, to be committed to the earth from which it was formed in the image of its creator;
the phantom or shadow, to descend into the depths, the kingdom of shadows. The gate to this kingdom was
placed in the West among the sunset hills, where the sun goes down daily,--where he dies. Thence arise the
changeful and corresponding conceptions connected with rising and setting, arriving and departing, being
born and dying. The careful preservation of the body after death from destruction, not only through the
process of inward decay, but also through violence or accident, was in the religion of ancient Egypt a principal
condition (perhaps introduced by the priests on sanitary grounds) on which depended the speedy deliverance
of the soul, and with this her early, appointed union with the source of Light and Good, which two properties
were, in idea, one and indivisible. In the Egyptian conceptions the soul was supposed to remain, in a certain
sense, connected with the body during a long cycle of solar years. She could, however, quit the body from
time to time at will, and could appear to mortals in various forms and places; these appearances differed
according to the hour, and were prescribed in exact words and delineations.]
"But enough of these matters; thou wilt find it difficult to enter into such thoughts. Tell me rather what thou
thinkest of our temples and pyramids."
Croesus, after reflecting a moment, answered with a smile: "Those huge pyramidal masses of stone seem to
me creations of the boundless desert, the gaily painted temple colonnades to be the children of the Spring; but
though the sphinxes lead up to your temple gates, and seem to point the way into the very shrines themselves,
the sloping fortress-like walls of the Pylons, those huge isolated portals, appear as if placed there to repel
entrance. Your many-colored hieroglyphics likewise attract the gaze, but baffle the inquiring spirit by the
mystery that lies within their characters. The images of your manifold gods are everywhere to be seen; they
crowd on our gaze, and yet who knows not that their real is not their apparent significance? that they are mere
outward images of thoughts accessible only to the few, and, as I have heard, almost incomprehensible in their
depth? My curiosity is excited everywhere, and my interest awakened, but my warm love of the beautiful feels
itself in no way attracted. My intellect might strain to penetrate the secrets of your sages, but my heart and
mind can never be at home in a creed which views life as a short pilgrimage to the grave, and death as the
CHAPTER IV. 40
only true life!"
"And yet," said Amasis, "Death has for us too his terrors, and we do all in our power to evade his grasp. Our
physicians would not be celebrated and esteemed as they are, if we did not believe that their skill could
prolong our earthly existence. This reminds me of the oculist Nebenchari whom I sent to Susa, to the king.
Does he maintain his reputation? is the king content with him?"
"Very much so," answered Croesus. "He has been of use to many of the blind; but the king's mother is alas!
still sightless. It was Nebenchari who first spoke to Cambyses of the charms of thy daughter Tachot. But we
deplore that he understands diseases of the eye alone. When the Princess Atossa lay ill of fever, he was not to
be induced to bestow a word of counsel."
"That is very natural; our physicians are only permitted to treat one part of the body. We have aurists, dentists
and oculists, surgeons for fractures of the bone, and others for internal diseases. By the ancient priestly law a
dentist is not allowed to treat a deaf man, nor a surgeon for broken bones a patient who is suffering from a
disease of the bowels, even though he should have a first rate knowledge of internal complaints. This law aims
at securing a great degree of real and thorough knowledge; an aim indeed, pursued by the priests (to whose
caste the physicians belong) with a most praiseworthy earnestness in all branches of science. Yonder lies the
house of the high-priest Neithotep, whose knowledge of astronomy and geometry was so highly praised, even
by Pythagoras. It lies next to the porch leading into the temple of the goddess Neith, the protectress of Sais.
Would I could show thee the sacred grove with its magnificent trees, the splendid pillars of the temple with
capitals modelled from the lotus-flower, and the colossal chapel which I caused to be wrought from a single
piece of granite, as an offering to the goddess; but alas! entrance is strictly refused to strangers by the priests.
Come, let us seek my wife and daughter; they have conceived an affection for thee, and indeed it is my wish
that thou shouldst gain a friendly feeling towards this poor maiden before she goes forth with thee to the
strange land, and to the strange nation whose princess she is to become. Wilt thou not adopt and take her
under thy care?"
"On that thou may'st with fullest confidence rely," replied Croesus with warmth, returning the pressure of
Amasis' hand. "I will protect thy Nitetis as if I were her father; and she will need my help, for the apartments
of the women in the Persian palaces are dangerous ground. But she will meet with great consideration.
Cambyses may be contented with his choice, and will be highly gratified that thou hast entrusted him with thy
fairest child. Nebenchari had only spoken of Tachot, thy second daughter."
"Nevertheless I will send my beautiful Nitetis. Tachot is so tender, that she could scarcely endure the fatigues
of the journey and the pain of separation. Indeed were I to follow the dictates of my own heart, Nitetis should
never leave us for Persia. But Egypt stands in need of peace, and I was a king before I became a father!"
CHAPTER V.
The other members of the Persian embassy had returned to Sais from their excursion up the Nile to the
pyramids. Prexaspes alone, the ambassador from Cambyses, had already set out for Persia, in order to inform
the king of the successful issue of his suit.
The palace of Amasis was full of life and stir. The huge building was filled in all parts by the followers of the
embassy, nearly three hundred in number, and by the high guests themselves, to whom every possible
attention was paid. The courts of the palace swarmed with guards and officials, with young priests and slaves,
all in splendid festal raiment.
On this day it was the king's intention to make an especial display of the wealth and splendor of his court, at a
festival arranged in honor of his daughter's betrothal.
CHAPTER V. 41
The lofty reception-hall opening on to the gardens, with its ceiling sown with thousands of golden stars and
supported by gaily-painted columns, presented a magic appearance. Lamps of colored papyrus hung against
the walls and threw a strange light on the scene, something like that when the sun's rays strike through colored
glass. The space between the columns and the walls was filled with choice plants, palms, oleanders,
pomegranates, oranges and roses, behind which an invisible band of harp and flute-players was stationed, who
received the guests with strains of monotonous, solemn music.
The floor of this hall was paved in black and white, and in the middle stood elegant tables covered with dishes
of all kinds, cold roast meats, sweets, well-arranged baskets of fruit and cake, golden jugs of wine, glass
drinking-cups and artistic flower-vases.
A multitude of richly-dressed slaves under direction of the high-steward, busied themselves in handing these
dishes to the guests, who, either standing around, or reclining on sumptuous seats, entertained themselves in
conversation with their friends.
Both sexes and all ages were to be found in this assembly. As the women entered, they received charming
little nosegays from the young priests in the personal service of the king, and many a youth of high degree
appeared in the hall with flowers, which he not only offered to her he loved best, but held up for her to smell.
The Egyptian men, who were dressed as we have already seen them at the reception of the Persian embassy,
behaved towards the women with a politeness that might almost be termed submissive. Among the latter few
could pretend to remarkable beauty, though there were many bewitching almond-shaped eyes, whose
loveliness was heightened by having their lids dyed with the eye-paint called "mestem." The majority wore
their hair arranged in the same manner; the wealth of waving brown locks floated back over the shoulders and
was brushed behind the ears, one braid being left on each side to hang over the temples to the breast. A broad
diadem confined these locks, which as the maids knew, were quite as often the wig-maker's work as Nature's.
Many ladies of the court wore above their foreheads a lotus-flower, whose stem drooped on the hair at the
back.
They carried fans of bright feathers in their delicate hands. These were loaded with rings; the finger-nails were
stained red, according to Egyptian custom, and gold or silver bands were worn above the elbow, and at the
wrists and ankles.
[This custom (of staining finger-nails) is still prevalent in the East; the plant Shenna, Laosonia spinosa, called
by Pliny XIII. Cyprus, being used for the purpose. The Egyptian government has prohibited the dye, but it
will be difficult to uproot the ancient custom. The pigment for coloring the eyelids, mentioned in the text, is
also still employed. The Papyrus Ebers alludes to the Arabian kohl or antimony, which is frequently
mentioned under the name of "mestem" on monuments belonging to the time of the Pharaohs.]
Their robes were beautiful and costly, and in many cases so cut as to leave the right breast uncovered. Bartja,
the young Persian prince, among the men, and Nitetis, the Pharaoh's daughter, among the women, were
equally conspicuous for their superior beauty, grace and charms. The royal maiden wore a transparent
rose-colored robe, in her black hair were fresh roses, she walked by the side of her sister, the two robed alike,
but Nitetis pale as the lotus-flower in her mother's hair.
Ladice, the queen, by birth a Greek, and daughter of Battus of Cyrene, walked by the side of Amasis and
presented the young Persians to her children. A light lace robe was thrown over her garment of purple,
embroidered with gold; and on her beautiful Grecian head she wore the Urmus serpent, the ornament peculiar
to Egyptian queens.
Her countenance was noble yet charming, and every movement betrayed the grace only to be imparted by a
Greek education.
CHAPTER V. 42
Amasis, in making choice of this queen, after the death of his second wife, (the Egyptian Tentcheta, mother of
Psamtik the heir to the throne,) had followed his prepossession in favor of the Greek nation and defied the
wrath of the priests.
The two girls at Ladice's side, Tachot and Nitetis, were called twin- sisters, but showed no signs of that
resemblance usually to be found in twins.
Tachot was a fair, blue-eyed girl, small, and delicately built; Nitetis, on the other hand, tall and majestic, with
black hair and eyes, evinced in every action that she was of royal blood.
"How pale thou look'st, my child!" said Ladice, kissing Nitetis' cheek. "Be of good courage, and meet thy
future bravely. Here is the noble Bartja, the brother of thy future husband."
Nitetis raised her dark, thoughtful eyes and fixed them long and enquiringly on the beautiful youth. He bowed
low before the blushing maiden, kissed her garment, and said:
"I salute thee, as my future queen and sister! I can believe that thy heart is sore at parting from thy home, thy
parents, brethren and sisters; but be of good courage; thy husband is a great hero, and a powerful king; our
mother is the noblest of women, and among the Persians the beauty and virtue of woman is as much revered
as the life-giving light of the sun. Of thee, thou sister of the lily Nitetis, whom, by her side I might venture to
call the rose, I beg forgiveness, for robbing thee of thy dearest friend."
As he said these words he looked eagerly into Tachot's beautiful blue eyes; she bent low, pressing her hand
upon her heart, and gazed on him long after Amasis had drawn him away to a seat immediately opposite the
dancing-girls, who were just about to display their skill for the entertainment of the guests. A thin petticoat
was the only clothing of these girls, who threw and wound their flexible limbs to a measure played on harp
and tambourine. After the dance appeared Egyptian singers and buffoons for the further amusement of the
company.
At length some of the courtiers forsook the hall, their grave demeanor being somewhat overcome by
intoxication.
[Unfortunately women, as well as men, are to be seen depicted on the monuments in an intoxicated condition.
One man is being carried home, like a log of wood, on the heads of his servants. Wilkinson II. 168. Another is
standing on his head II. 169. and several ladies are in the act of returning the excessive quantity which they
have drunk. Wilkinson II. 167. At the great Techu-festival at Dendera intoxication seems to have been as
much commanded as at the festivals of Dionysus under the Ptolemies, one of whom (Ptolemy Dionysus)
threatened those who remained sober with the punishment of death. But intoxication was in general looked
upon by the Egyptians as a forbidden and despicable vice. In the Papyrus Anastasi IV., for instance, we read
these words on a drunkard: "Thou art as a sanctuary without a divinity, as a house without bread," and further:
"How careftilly should men avoid beer (hek)." A number of passages in the Papyrus denounce drunkards.]
The women were carried home in gay litters by slaves with torches; and only the highest military
commanders, the Persian ambassadors and a few officials, especial friends of Amasis, remained behind. These
were retained by the master of the ceremonies, and conducted to a richly- ornamented saloon, where a
gigantic wine-bowl standing on a table adorned in the Greek fashion, invited to a drinking-bout.
Amasis was seated on a high arm-chair at the head of the table; at his left the youthful Bartja, at his right the
aged Croesus. Besides these and the other Persians, Theodorus and Ibykus, the friends of Polykrates, already
known to us, and Aristomachus, now commander of the Greek body- guard, were among the king's guests.
Amasis, whom we have just heard in such grave discourse with Croesus, now indulged in jest and satire. He
CHAPTER V. 43
seemed once more the wild officer, the bold reveller of the olden days.
His sparkling, clever jokes, at times playful, at times scornful, flew round among the revellers. The guests
responded in loud, perhaps often artificial laughter, to their king's jokes, goblet after goblet was emptied, and
the rejoicings had reached their highest point, when suddenly the master of the ceremonies appeared, bearing
a small gilded mummy; and displaying it to the gaze of the assembly, exclaimed. "Drink, jest, and be merry,
for all too soon ye shall become like unto this!"
[Wilkinson gives drawings of these mummies (II. 410.) hundreds of which were placed in the tombs, and have
been preserved to us. Lucian was present at a banquet, when they were handed round. The Greeks seem to
have adopted this custom, but with their usual talent for beautifying all they touched, substituted a winged
figure of death for the mummy. Maxims similar to the following one are by no means rare. "Cast off all care;
be mindful only of pleasure until the day cometh when then must depart on the journey, whose goal is the
realm of silence!" Copied from the tomb of Neferhotep to Abd- el-Qurnah.]
"Is it your custom thus to introduce death at all your banquets?" said Bartja, becoming serious, "or is this only
a jest devised for to-day by your master of the ceremonies?"
"Since the earliest ages," answered Amasis, "it has been our custom to display these mummies at banquets, in
order to increase the mirth of the revellers, by reminding them that one must enjoy the time while it is here.
Thou, young butterfly, hast still many a long and joyful year before thee; but we, Croesus, we old men, must
hold by this firmly. Fill the goblets, cup-bearer, let not one moment of our lives be wasted! Thou canst drink
well, thou golden-haired Persian! Truly the great gods have endowed thee not only with beautiful eyes, and
blooming beauty, but with a good throat! Let me embrace thee, thou glorious youth, thou rogue! What
thinkest thou Croesus? my daughter Tachot can speak of nothing else than of this beardless youth, who seems
to have quite turned her little head with his sweet looks and words. Thou needest not to blush, young madcap!
A man such as thou art, may well look at king's daughters; but wert thou thy father Cyrus himself, I could not
allow my Tachot to leave me for Persia!"
"Father!" whispered the crown-prince Psamtik, interrupting this conversation. "Father, take care what you say,
and remember Phanes." The king turned a frowning glance on his son; but following his advice, took much
less part in the conversation, which now became more general.
The seat at the banquet-table, occupied by Aristomachus, placed him nearly opposite to Croesus, on whom, in
total silence and without once indulging in a smile at the king's jests, his eyes had been fixed from the
beginning of the revel. When the Pharaoh ceased to speak, he accosted Croesus suddenly with the following
question: "I would know, Lydian, whether the snow still covered the mountains, when ye left Persia."
Smiling, and a little surprised at this strange speech, Croesus answered: "Most of the Persian mountains were
green when we started for Egypt four months ago; but there are heights in the land of Cambyses on which,
even in the hottest seasons, the snow never melts, and the glimmer of their white crests we could still
perceive, as we descended into the plains."
The Spartan's face brightened visibly, and Croesus, attracted by this serious, earnest man, asked his name.
"My name is Aristomachus."
"That name seems known to me."
"You were acquainted with many Hellenes, and my name is common among them."
"Your dialect would bespeak you my opinion a Spartan."
CHAPTER V. 44
"I was one once."
"And now no more?"
"He who forsakes his native land without permission, is worthy of death."
"Have you forsaken it with your own free-will?"
"Yes."
"For what reason?"
"To escape dishonor."
"What was your crime?"
"I had committed none."
"You were accused unjustly?"
"Yes."
"Who was the author of your ill-fortune?"
"Yourself."
Croesus started from his seat. The serious tone and gloomy face of the Spartan proved that this was no jest,
and those who sat near the speakers, and had been following this strange dialogue, were alarmed and begged
Aristomachus to explain his words.
He hesitated and seemed unwilling to speak; at last, however, at the king's summons, he began thus:
"In obedience to the oracle, you, Croesus, had chosen us Lacedaemonians, as the most powerful among the
Hellenes, to be your allies against the might of Persia; and you gave us gold for the statue of Apollo on Mount
Thornax. The ephori, on this, resolved to present you with a gigantic bronze wine-bowl, richly wrought. I was
chosen as bearer of this gift. Before reaching Sardis our ship was wrecked in a storm. The wine-cup sank with
it, and we reached Samos with nothing but our lives. On returning home I was accused by enemies, and those
who grudged my good fortune, of having sold both ship and wine-vessel to the Samians. As they could not
convict me of the crime, and had yet determined on my ruin, I was sentenced to two days' and nights'
exposure on the pillory. My foot was chained to it during the night; but before the morning of disgrace
dawned, my brother brought me secretly a sword, that my honor might he saved, though at the expense of my
life. But I could not die before revenging myself on the men who had worked my ruin; and therefore, cutting
the manacled foot from my leg, I escaped, and hid in the rushes on the banks of the Furotas. My brother
brought me food and drink in secret; and after two months I was able to walk on the wooden leg you now see.
Apollo undertook my revenge; he never misses his mark, and my two worst opponents died of the plague.
Still I durst not return home, and at length took ship from Gythium to fight against the Persians under you,
Croesus. On landing at Teos, I heard that you were king no longer, that the mighty Cyrus, the father of yonder
beautiful youth, had conquered the powerful province of Lydia in a few weeks, and reduced the richest of
kings to beggary."
Every guest gazed at Aristomachus in admiration. Croesus shook his hard hand; and Bartja exclaimed:
"Spartan, I would I could take you back with me to Susa, that my friends there might see what I have seen
CHAPTER V. 45
myself, the most courageous, the most honorable of men!"
"Believe me, boy," returned Aristomachus smiling, every Spartan would have done the same. In our country it
needs more courage to be a coward than a brave man."
"And you, Bartja," cried Darius, the Persian king's cousin, "could you have borne to stand at the pillory?"
Bartja reddened, but it was easy to see that he too preferred death to disgrace.
"Zopyrus, what say you?" asked Darius of the third young Persian.
"I could mutilate my own limbs for love of you two," answered he, grasping unobserved the hands of his two
friends.
With an ironical smile Psamtik sat watching this scene--the pleased faces of Amasis, Croesus and Gyges, the
meaning glances of the Egyptians, and the contented looks with which Aristomachus gazed on the young
heroes.
Ibykus now told of the oracle which had promised Aristomachus a return to his native land, on the approach
of the men from the snowy mountains, and at the same time, mentioned the hospitable house of Rhodopis.
On hearing this name Psamtik grew restless; Croesus expressed a wish to form the acquaintance of the
Thracian matron, of whom AEsop had related so much that was praiseworthy; and, as the other guests, many
of whom had lost consciousness through excessive drinking, were leaving the hall, the dethroned monarch, the
poet, the sculptor and the Spartan hero made an agreement to go to Naukratis the next day, and there enjoy the
conversation of Rhodopis.
CHAPTER VI.
On the night following the banquet just described, Amasis allowed himself only three hours' rest. On this, as
on every other morning, the young priests wakened him at the first cock-crow, conducted him as usual to the
bath, arrayed him in the royal vestments and led him to the altar in the court of the palace, where in presence
of the populace he offered sacrifice. During the offering the priests sang prayers in a loud voice, enumerated
the virtues of their king, and, that blame might in no case light on the head of their ruler, made his bad
advisers responsible for every deadly sin committed in ignorance.
They exhorted him to the performance of good deeds, while extolling his virtues; read aloud profitable
portions of the holy writings, containing the deeds and sayings of great men, and then conducted him to his
apartments, where letters and information from all parts of the kingdom awaited him.
Amasis was in the habit of observing most faithfully these daily-repeated ceremonies and hours of work; the
remaining portion of the day he spent as it pleased him, and generally in cheerful society.
The priests reproached him with this, alleging that such a life was not suited to a monarch; and on one
occasion he had thus replied to the indignant high-priest: "Look at this bow! if always bent it must lose its
power, but, if used for half of each day and then allowed to rest, it will remain strong and useful till the string
breaks."
Amasis had just signed his name to the last letter, granting the petition of a Nornarch--[Administrator of a
Province]--for money to carry on different embankments rendered necessary by the last inundation, when a
servant entered, bringing a request from the crown-prince Psamtik for an audience of a few minutes.
CHAPTER VI. 46
Amasis, who till this moment had been smiling cheerfully at the cheering reports from all parts of the country,
now became suddenly serious and thoughtful. After long delay he answered: "Go and inform the prince that
he may appear."
Psamtik appeared, pale and gloomy as ever; he bowed low and reverentially, on entering his father's presence.
Amasis nodded silently in return, and then asked abruptly and sternly: "What is thy desire? my time is
limited."
"For your son, more than for others," replied the prince with quivering lips. "Seven times have I petitioned for
the great favor, which thou grantest for the first time to-day."
"No reproaches! I suspect the reason of thy visit. Thou desirest an answer to thy doubts as to the birth of thy
sister Nitetis."
"I have no curiosity; I come rather to warn thee, and to remind thee that I am not the only one who is
acquainted with this mystery."
"Speakest thou of Phanes?"
"Of whom else should I speak? He is banished from Egypt and from his own country, and must leave
Naukratis in a few days. What guarantee hast thou, that he will not betray us to the Persians?"
"The friendship and kindness which I have always shown him."
"Dost thou believe in the gratitude of men?"
"No! but I rely on my own discernment of character. Phanes will not betray us! he is my friend, I repeat it!"
"Thy friend perhaps, but my mortal enemy!"
"Then stand on thy guard! I have nothing to fear from him."
"For thyself perhaps nought, but for our country! O father, reflect that though as thy son I may be hateful in
thine eyes, yet as Egypt's future I ought to be near thy heart. Remember, that at thy death, which may the gods
long avert, I shall represent the existence of this glorious land as thou dost now; my fall will be the ruin of
thine house, of Egypt!"
Amasis became more and more serious, and Psamtik went on eagerly: "Thou knowest that I am right! Phanes
can betray our land to any foreign enemy; he is as intimately acquainted with it as we are; and beside this, he
possesses a secret, the knowledge of which would convert our most powerful ally into a most formidable
enemy."
"There thou art in error. Though not mine, Nitetis is a king's daughter and will know how to win the love of
her husband."
"Were she the daughter of a god, she could not save thee from Cambyses' wrath, if he discovers the treachery;
lying is to a Persian the worst of crimes, to be deceived the greatest disgrace; thou hast deceived the highest
and proudest of the nation, and what can one inexperienced girl avail, when hundreds of women, deeply
versed in intrigue and artifice, are striving for the favor of their lord?"
"Hatred and revenge are good masters in the art of rhetoric," said Amasis in a cutting tone. "And think'st thou
CHAPTER VI. 47
then, oh, foolish son, that I should have undertaken such a dangerous game without due consideration? Phanes
may tell the Persians what he likes, he can never prove his point. I, the father, Ladice the mother must know
best whether Nitetis is our child or not. We call her so, who dare aver the contrary? If it please Phanes to
betray our land to any other enemy beside the Persians, let him; I fear nothing! Thou wouldst have me ruin a
man who has been my friend, to whom I owe much gratitude, who has served me long and faithfully; and this
without offence from his side. Rather will I shelter him from thy revenge, knowing as I do the impure source
from which it springs."
"My father!"
"Thou desirest the ruin of this man, because he hindered thee from taking forcible possession of the
granddaughter of Rhodopis, and because thine own incapacity moved me to place him in thy room as
commander of the troops. Ah! thou growest pale! Verily, I owe Phanes thanks for confiding to me your vile
intentions, and so enabling me to bind my friends and supporters, to whom Rhodopis is precious, more firmly
to my throne."
"And is it thus thou speakest of these strangers, my father? dost thou thus forget the ancient glory of Egypt?
Despise me, if thou wilt; I know thou lovest me not; but say not that to be great we need the help of strangers!
Look back on our history! Were we not greatest when our gates were closed to the stranger, when we
depended on ourselves and our own strength, and lived according to the ancient laws of our ancestors and our
gods? Those days beheld the most distant lands subjugated by Rameses, and heard Egypt celebrated in the
whole world as its first and greatest nation. What are we now? The king himself calls beggars and foreigners
the supporters of his throne, and devises a petty stratagem to secure the friendship of a power over whom we
were victorious before the Nile was infested by these strangers. Egypt was then a mighty Queen in glorious
apparel; she is now a painted woman decked out in tinsel!"
[Rameses the Great, son of Sethos, reigned over Egypt 1394-1328 B. C. He was called Sesostris by the
Greeks; see Lepsius (Chron. d. Aegypter, p. 538.) on the manner in which this confusion of names arose.
Egypt attained the zenith of her power under this king, whose army, according to Diodorus (I. 53-58).
consisted of 600,000 foot and 24,000 horsemen, 27,000 chariots and 400 ships of war. With these hosts he
subdued many of the Asiatic and African nations, carving his name and likeness, as trophies of victory, on the
rocks of the conquered countries. Herodotus speaks of having seen two of these inscriptions himself (II.
102-106.) and two are still to be found not far from Bairut. His conquests brought vast sums of tribute into
Egypt. Tacitus annal. II. 60. and these enabled him to erect magnificent buildings in the whole length of his
land from Nubia to Tanis, but more especially in Thebes, the city in which he resided. One of the obelisks
erected by Rameses at Heliopolis is now standing in the Place de la Concorde at Paris, and has been lately
translated by E. Chabas. On the walls of the yet remaining palaces and temples, built under this mighty king,
we find, even to this day, thousands of pictures representing himself, his armed hosts, the many nations
subdued by the power of his arms, and the divinities to whose favor he believed these victories were owing.
Among the latter Ammon and Bast seem to have received his especial veneration, and, on the other hand, we
read in these inscriptions that the gods were very willing to grant the wishes of their favorite. A poetical
description of the wars he waged with the Cheta is to be found in long lines of hieroglyphics on the south wall
of the hall of columns of Rameses II. at Karnal, also at Luxor and in the Sallier Papyrus, and an epic poem
referring to his mighty deeds in no less than six different places.]
"Have a care what thou sayest!" shouted Amasis stamping on the floor. "Egypt was never so great, so
flourishing as now! Rameses carried our arms into distant lands and earned blood; through my labors the
products of our industry have been carried to all parts of the world and instead of blood, have brought us
treasure and blessing. Rameses caused the blood and sweat of his subjects to flow in streams for the honor of
his own great name; under my rule their blood flows rarely, and the sweat of their brow only in works of
usefulness. Every citizen can now end his days in prosperity and comfort. Ten thousand populous cities rise
on the shores of the Nile, not a foot of the soil lies untilled, every child enjoys the protection of law and
justice, and every ill-doer shuns the watchful eye of the authorities.
"In case of attack from without, have we not, as defenders of those god- given bulwarks, our cataracts, our sea
and our deserts, the finest army that ever bore arms? Thirty thousand Hellenes beside our entire Egyptian
military caste? such is the present condition of Egypt! Rameses purchased the bright tinsel of empty fame
with the blood and tears of his people. To me they are indebted for the pure gold of a peaceful welfare as
citizens--to me and to my predecessors, the Saitic kings!"
[The science of fortification was very fairly understood by the ancient Egyptians. Walled and battlemented
forts are to be seen depicted on their monuments. We have already endeavored to show (see our work on
Egypt. I. 78 and following) that, on the northeast, Egypt defended from Asiatic invasion by a line of forts
extending from Pelusium to the Red Sea.]
"And yet I tell thee," cried the prince, "that a worm is gnawing at the root of Egypt's greatness and her life.
This struggle for riches and splendor corrupts the hearts of the people, foreign luxury has given a deadly blow
to the simple manners of our citizens, and many an Egyptian has been taught by the Greeks to scoff at the
gods of his fathers. Every day brings news of bloody strife between the Greek mercenaries and our native
soldiery, between our own people and the strangers. The shepherd and his flock are at variance; the wheels of
the state machinery are grinding one another and thus the state itself, into total ruin. This once, father, though
never again, I must speak out clearly what is weighing on my heart. While engaged in contending with the
priests, thou hast seen with calmness the young might of Persia roll on from the East, consuming the nations
on its way, and, like a devouring monster, growing more and more formidable from every fresh prey. Thine
aid was not, as thou hadst intended, given to the Lydians and Babylonians against the enemy, but to the
Greeks in the building of temples to their false gods. At last resistance seemed hopeless; a whole hemisphere
with its rulers lay in submission at the feet of Persia; but even then the gods willed Egypt a chance of
deliverance. Cambyses desired thy daughter in marriage. Thou, however, too weak to sacrifice thine own flesh
and blood for the good of all, hast substituted another maiden, not thine own child, as an offering to the
mighty monarch; and at the same time, in thy soft-heartedness, wilt spare the life of a stranger in whose hand
he the fortunes of this realm, and who will assuredly work its ruin; unless indeed, worn out by internal
dissension, it perish even sooner from its own weakness!"
Thus far Amasis had listened to these revilings of all he held dearest in silence, though pale, and trembling
with rage; but now he broke forth in a voice, the trumpet-like sound of which pealed through the wide hall:
"Know'st thou not then, thou boasting and revengeful son of evil, thou future destroyer of this ancient and
glorious kingdom, know'st thou not whose life must be the sacrifice, were not my children, and the dynasty
which I have founded, dearer to me than the welfare of the whole realm? Thou, Psamtik, thou art the man,
branded by the gods, feared by men--the man to whose heart love and friendship are strangers, whose face is
never seen to smile, nor his soul known to feel compassion! It is not, however, through thine own sin that thy
nature is thus unblessed, that all thine undertakings end unhappily. Give heed, for now I am forced to relate
what I had hoped long to keep secret from thine ears. After dethroning my predecessor, I forced him to give
me his sister Tentcheta in marriage. She loved me; a year after marriage there was promise of a child. During
the night preceding thy birth I fell asleep at the bedside of my wife. I dreamed that she was lying on the shores
of the Nile, and complained to me of pain in the breast. Bending down, I beheld a cypress-tree springing from
her heart. It grew larger and larger, black and spreading, twined its roots around thy mother and strangled her.
A cold shiver seized me, and I was on the point of flying from the spot, when a fierce hurricane came from the
East, struck the tree and overthrew it, so that its spreading branches were cast into the Nile. Then the waters
ceased to flow; they congealed, and, in place of the river, a gigantic mummy lay before me. The towns on its
banks dwindled into huge funereal urns, surrounding the vast corpse of the Nile as in a tomb. At this I awoke
and caused the interpreters of dreams to be summoned. None could explain the vision, till at last the priests of
the Libyan Ammon gave me the following interpretation 'Tentcheta will die in giving birth to a son. The
cypress, which strangled its mother, is this gloomy, unhappy man. In his days a people shall come from the
East and shall make of the Nile, that is of the Egyptians, dead bodies, and of their cities ruinous heaps; these
CHAPTER VI. 49
are the urns for the dead, which thou sawest."
Psamtik listened as if turned into stone; his father continued; "Thy mother died in giving birth to thee;
fiery-red hair, the mark of the sons of Typhon, grew around thy brow; thou becam'st a gloomy man.
Misfortune pursued thee and robbed thee of a beloved wife and four of thy children. The astrologers computed
that even as I had been born under the fortunate sign of Amman, so thy birth had been watched over by the
rise of the awful planet Seb. Thou . . ." But here Amasis broke off, for Psamtik, in the anguish produced by
these fearful disclosures had given way, and with sobs and groans, cried:
"Cease, cruel father! spare me at least the bitter words, that I am the only son in Egypt who is hated by his
father without cause!"
Amasis looked down on the wretched man who had sunk to the earth before him, his face hidden in the folds
of his robe, and the father's wrath was changed to compassion. He thought of Psamtik's mother, dead forty
years before, and felt he had been cruel in inflicting this poisonous wound on her son's soul. It was the first
time for years, that he had been able to feel towards this cold strange man, as a father and a comforter. For the
first time he saw tears in the cold eyes of his son, and could feel the joy of wiping them away. He seized the
opportunity at once, and bending clown over the groaning form, kissed his forehead, raised him from the
ground and said gently:
"Forgive my anger, my son! the words that have grieved thee came not from my heart, but were spoken in the
haste of wrath. Many years hast thou angered me by thy coldness, hardness and obstinacy; to-day thou hast
wounded me again in my most sacred feelings; this hurried me into an excess of wrath. But now all is right
between us. Our natures are so diverse that our innermost feelings will never be one, but at least we can act in
concert for the future, and show forbearance one towards the other."
In silence Psamtik bowed down and kissed his father's robe "Not so," exclaimed the latter; "rather let my lips
receive thy kiss, as is meet and fitting between father and son! Thou needest not to think again of the evil
dream I have related. Dreams are phantoms, and even if sent by the gods, the interpreters thereof are human
and erring. Thy hand trembles still, thy cheeks are white as thy robe. I was hard towards thee, harder than a
father. . . ."
"Harder than a stranger to strangers," interrupted his son. "Thou hast crushed and broken me, and if till now
my face has seldom worn a smile, from this day forward it can be naught but a mirror of my inward misery."
"Not so," said Amasis, laying his hand on his son's shoulder. "If I wound, I can also heal. Tell me the dearest
wish of thy heart, it shall be granted thee!"
Psamtik's eyes flashed, his sallow cheeks glowed for a moment, and he answered without consideration,
though in a voice still trembling from the shock he had just received: "Deliver Phanes, my enemy, into my
power!"
The king remained a few moments in deep thought, then answered: "I knew what thou wouldst ask, and will
fulfil thy desire: but I would rather thou hadst asked the half of my treasures. A thousand voices within warn
me that I am about to do an unworthy deed and a ruinous--ruinous for myself, for thee, the kingdom and our
house. Reflect before acting, and remember, whatever thou mayst meditate against Phanes, not a hair of
Rhodopis' head shall be touched. Also, that the persecution of my poor friend is to remain a secret from the
Greeks. Where shall I find his equal as a commander, an adviser and a companion? He is not yet in thy power,
however, and I advise thee to remember, that though thou mayst be clever for an Egyptian, Phanes is a clever
Greek. I will remind thee too of thy solemn oath to renounce the grandchild of Rhodopis. Methinks vengeance
is dearer to thee than love, and the amends I offer will therefore be acceptable! As to Egypt, I repeat once
again, she was never more flourishing than now; a fact which none dream of disputing, except the priests, and
CHAPTER VI. 50
those who retail their foolish words. And now give ear, if thou wouldst know the origin of Nitetis.
Self-interest will enjoin secrecy."
Psamtik listened eagerly to his father's communication, indicating his gratitude at the conclusion by a warm
pressure of the hand.
"Now farewell," said Amasis. "Forget not my words, and above all shed no blood! I will know nothing of
what happens to Phanes, for I hate cruelty and would not be forced to stand in horror of my own son. But
thou, thou rejoicest! My poor Athenian, better were it for thee, hadst thou never entered Egypt!"
Long after Psamtik had left, his father continued to pace the hall in deep thought. He was sorry he had
yielded; it already seemed as if he saw the bleeding Phanes lying massacred by the side of the dethroned
Hophra. "It is true, he could have worked our ruin," was the plea he offered to the accuser within his own
breast, and with these words, he raised his head, called his servants and left the apartment with a smiling
countenance.
Had this sanguine man, this favorite of fortune, thus speedily quieted the warning voice within, or was he
strong enough to cloak his torture with a smile?
ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:
Avoid excessive joy as well as complaining grief Cast off all care; be mindful only of pleasure Creed which
views life as a short pilgrimage to the grave Does happiness consist then in possession Happiness has nothing
to do with our outward circumstances In our country it needs more courage to be a coward Observe a due
proportion in all things One must enjoy the time while it is here Pilgrimage to the grave, and death as the only
true life Robes cut as to leave the right breast uncovered The priests are my opponents, my masters Time is
clever in the healing art We live for life, not for death
AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS.
By Georg Ebers
Volume 3.
CHAPTER VII.
Psamtik went at once from his father's apartments to the temple of the goddess Neith. At the entrance he asked
for the high-priest and was begged by one of the inferior priests to wait, as the great Neithotep was at that
moment praying in the holiest sanctuary of the exalted Queen of Heaven.
[The temples of Egypt were so constructed as to intensify the devotion of the worshipper by conducting him
onward through a series of halls or chambers gradually diminishing in size. "The way through these temples is
clearly indicated, no digression is allowed, no error possible. We wander on through the huge and massive
gates of entrance, between the ranks of sacred animals. The worshipper is received into an ample court, but by
degrees the walls on either side approach one another, the halls become less lofty, all is gradually tending
towards one point. And thus we wander on, the sights and sounds of God's world without attract us no longer,
we see nothing but the sacred representations which encompass us so closely, feel only the solemnity of the
temple in which we stand. And the consecrated walls embrace us ever more and more closely, until at last we
reach the lonely, resonant chamber occupied by the divinity himself, and entered by no human being save his
priest." Schnaase, Kunstaeschirhtc I. 394.]
CHAPTER VII. 51
After a short time a young priest appeared with the intelligence that his superior awaited the Prince's visit.
Psamtik had seated himself under the shadow of the sacred grove of silver poplars bordering the shores of the
consecrated lake, holy to the great Neith. He rose immediately, crossed the temple-court, paved with stone and
asphalte, on which the sun's rays were darting like fiery arrows, and turned into one of the long avenues of
Sphinxes which led to the isolated Pylons before the gigantic temple of the goddess. He then passed through
the principal gate, ornamented, as were all Egyptian temple-entrances, with the winged sun's disc. Above its
widely-opened folding doors arose on either side, tower-like buildings, slender obelisks and waving flags. The
front of the temple, rising from the earth in the form of an obtuse angle, had somewhat the appearance of a
fortress, and was covered with colored pictures and inscriptions. Through the porch Psamtik passed on into a
lofty entrance-chamber, and from thence into the great hall itself, the ceiling of which was strewn with
thousands of golden stars, and supported by four rows of lofty pillars. Their capitals were carved in imitation
of the lotus-flower, and these, the shafts of the columns, the walls of this huge hall, and indeed every niche
and corner that met the eye were covered with brilliant colors and hieroglyphics. The columns rose to a
gigantic height, the eye seemed to wander through immeasurable space, and the air breathed by the
worshippers was heavy with the fragrance of Kyphi and incense, and the odors which arose from the
laboratory attached to the temple. Strains of soft music, proceeding from invisible hands, flowed on
unceasingly, only occasionally interrupted by the deep lowing of the sacred cows of Isis, or the shrill call of
the sparrow-hawk of Horus, whose habitations were in one of the adjoining halls. No sooner did the prolonged
low of a cow break like distant thunder on the ear, or the sharp cry of the sparrow-hawk shoot like a flash of
lightning through the nerves of the worshippers, than each crouching form bent lower still, and touched the
pavement with his forehead. On a portion of this pavement, raised above the rest, stood the priests, some
wearing ostrich- feathers on their bald and shining heads; others panther-skins over their white-robed
shoulders. Muttering and singing, bowing low and rising again, they swung the censers and poured libations
of pure water to the gods out of golden vessels. In this immense temple man seemed a dwarf in his own eyes.
All his senses even to the organs of respiration, were occupied by objects far removed from daily life, objects
that thrilled and almost oppressed him. Snatched from all that was familiar in his daily existence, he seemed
to grow dizzy and seek support beyond himself. To this the voice of the priests directed him and the cries of
the sacred animals were believed to prove a divinity at hand.
Psamtik assumed the posture of a worshipper on the low, gilded and cushioned couch set apart for him, but
was unable to pay any real devotion, and passed on to the adjoining apartment before mentioned, where the
sacred cows of Isis-Neith and the sparrow-hawk of Horus were kept. These creatures were concealed from the
gaze of the worshippers by a curtain of rich fabric embroidered with gold; the people were only allowed an
occasional and distant glimpse of the adorable animals. When Psamtik passed they were just being fed; cakes
soaked in milk, salt and clover-blossoms were placed in golden cribs for the cows, and small birds of
many-colored plumage in the beautifully-wrought and ornamented cage of the sparrow-hawk. But, in his
present mood, the heir to the throne of Egypt had no eye for these rare sights; but ascended at once, by means
of a hidden staircase, to the chambers lying near the observatory, where the high-priest was accustomed to
repose after the temple-service.
Neithotep, a man of seventy years, was seated in a splendid apartment. Rich Babylonian carpets covered the
floor and his chair was of gold, cushioned with purple. A tastefully-carved footstool supported his feet, his
hands held a roll covered with hieroglyphics, and a boy stood behind him with a fan of ostrich-feathers to
keep away the insects.
The face of the old man was deeply lined now, but it might once have been handsome, and in the large blue
eyes there still lay evidence of a quick intellect and a dignified self-respect.
His artificial curls had been laid aside, and the bald, smooth head formed a strange contrast to the furrowed
countenance, giving an appearance of unusual height to the forehead, generally so very low among the
Egyptians. The brightly-colored walls of the room, on which numerous sentences in hieroglyphic characters
were painted, the different statues of the goddess painted likewise in gay colors, and the snow-white garments
CHAPTER VII. 52
of the aged priest, were calculated to fill a stranger not only with wonder, but with a species of awe.
The old man received the prince with much affection, and asked:
"What brings my illustrious son to the poor servant of the Deity?"
"I have much to report to thee, my father;" answered Psamtik with a triumphant smile, "for I come in this
moment from Amasis."
"Then he has at length granted thee an audience?"
"At length!"
"Thy countenance tells me that thou hast been favorably received by our lord, thy father."
"After having first experienced his wrath. For, when I laid before him the petition with which thou hadst
entrusted me, he was exceeding wroth and nearly crushed me by his awful words."
"Thou hadst surely grieved him by thy language. Didst thou approach him as I advised thee, with lowliness, as
a son humbly beseeching his father?"
"No, my father, I was irritated and indignant."
"Then was Amasis right to be wrathful, for never should a son meet his father in anger; still less when he hath
a request to bring before him. Thou know'st the promise, 'The days of him that honoreth his father shall be
many.'
[This Egyptian command hears a remarkable resemblance to the fifth in the Hebrew decalogue, both having a
promise annexed. It occurs in the Prisse Papyrus, the most ancient sacred writing extant.]
In this one thing, my scholar, thou errest always; to gain thine ends thou usest violence and roughness, where
good and gentle words would more surely prevail. A kind word hath far more power than an angry one, and
much may depend on the way in which a man ordereth his speech. Hearken to that which I will now relate. In
former years there was a king in Egypt named Snefru, who ruled in Memphis. And it came to pass that he
dreamed, and in his dream his teeth fell out of his mouth. And he sent for the soothsayers and told them the
dream. The first interpreter answered: 'Woe unto thee, O king, all thy kinsmen shall die before thee!' Then was
Snefru wroth, caused this messenger of evil to be scourged, and sent for a second interpreter. He answered: 'O
king, live for ever, thy life shall be longer than the life of thy kinsmen and the men of thy house!' Then the
king smiled and gave presents unto this interpreter, for though the interpretations were one, yet he had
understood to clothe his message in a web of fair and pleasant words. Apprehendest thou? then hearken to my
voice, and refrain from harsh words, remembering that to the ear of a ruler the manner of a man's speech is
weightier than its matter."
"Oh my father, how often hast thou thus admonished me! how often have I been convinced of the evil
consequences of my rough words and angry gestures! but I cannot change my nature, I cannot . . ."
"Say rather: I will not; for he that is indeed a man, dare never again commit those sins of which he has once
repented. But I have admonished sufficiently. Tell me now how thou didst calm the wrath of Amasis."
"Thou knowest my father. When he saw that he had wounded me in the depths of my soul by his awful words,
he repented him of his anger. He felt he had been too hard, and desired to make amends at any price."
CHAPTER VII. 53
"He hath a kindly heart, but his mind is blinded, and his senses taken captive," cried the priest. "What might
not Amasis do for Egypt, would he but hearken to our counsel, and to the commandments of the gods!"
"But hear me, my father! in his emotion he granted me the life of Phanes!"
"Thine eyes flash, Psamtik! that pleaseth me not. The Athenian must die, for he has offended the gods; but
though he that condemns must let justice have her way, he should have no pleasure in the death of the
condemned; rather should he mourn. Now speak; didst thou obtain aught further?"
"The king declared unto me to what house Nitetis belongs."
"And further naught?"
"No, my father; but art thou not eager to learn ... ?"
"Curiosity is a woman's vice; moreover, I have long known all that thou canst tell me."
"But didst thou not charge me but yesterday to ask my father this question?"
"I did do so to prove thee, and know whether thou wert resigned to the Divine will, and wert walking in those
ways wherein alone thou canst become worthy of initiation into the highest grade of knowledge. Thou hast
told us faithfully all that thou hast heard, and thereby proved that thou canst obey--the first virtue of a priest."
"Thou knewest then the father of Nitetis?"
"I myself pronounced the prayer over king Hophra's tomb."
"But who imparted the secret to thee?"
"The eternal stars, my son, and my skill in reading them."
"And do these stars never deceive?"
"Never him that truly understands them."
Psamtik turned pale. His father's dream and his own fearful horoscope passed like awful visions through his
mind. The priest detected at once the change in his features and said gently: "Thou deem'st thyself a lost man
because the heavens prognosticated evil at thy birth; but take comfort, Psamtik; I observed another sign in the
heavens at that moment, which escaped the notice of the astrologers. Thy horoscope was a threatening, a very
threatening one, but its omens may be averted, they may . . ."
"O tell me, father, tell me how!"
"They must turn to good, if thou, forgetful of all else, canst live alone to the gods, paying a ready obedience to
the Divine voice audible to us their priests alone in the innermost and holiest sanctuary."
"Father, I am ready to obey thy slightest word."
"The great goddess Neith, who rules in Sais, grant this, my son!" answered the priest solemnly. "But now
leave me alone," he continued kindly, "lengthened devotions and the weight of years bring weariness. If
possible, delay the death of Phanes, I wish to speak with him before he dies. Yet one more word. A troop of
Ethiopians arrived yesterday. These men cannot speak a word of Greek, and under a faithful leader,
CHAPTER VII. 54
acquainted with the Athenians and the locality, they would be the best agents for getting rid of the doomed
man, as their ignorance of the language and the circumstances render treachery or gossip impossible. Before
starting for Naukratis, they must know nothing of the design of their journey; the deed once accomplished, we
can send them back to Kush.--[The Egyptian name for Ethiopia.] Remember, a secret can never be too
carefully kept! Farewell." Psamtik had only left the room a few moments, when a young priest entered, one of
the king's attendants.
"Have I listened well, father?" he enquired of the old man.
"Perfectly, my son. Nothing of that which passed between Amasis and Psamtik has escaped thine ears. May
Isis preserve them long to thee!"
"Ah, father, a deaf man could have heard every word in the ante-chamber to-day, for Amasis bellowed like an
ox."
"The great Neith has smitten him with the lack of prudence, yet I command thee to speak of the Pharaoh with
more reverence. But now return, keep thine eyes open and inform me at once if Amasis, as is possible, should
attempt to thwart the conspiracy against Phanes. Thou wilt certainly find me here. Charge the attendants to
admit no one, and to say I am at my devotions in the Holy of holies. May the ineffable One protect thy
footsteps!"
[Isis, the wife or sister of Osiris, is the phenomena of nature, by means of which the god is able to reveal
himself to human contemplation.]
..................................
While Psamtik was making every preparation for the capture of Phanes, Croesus, accompanied by his
followers, had embarked on board a royal bark, and was on his way down the Nile to spend the evening with
Rhodopis.
His son Gyges and the three young Persians remained in Sais, passing the time in a manner most agreeable to
them.
Amasis loaded them with civilities, allowed them, according to Egyptian custom, the society of his queen and
of the twin-sisters, as they were called, taught Gyges the game of draughts, and looking on while the strong,
dexterous, young heroes joined his daughters in the game of throwing balls and hoops, so popular among
Egyptian maidens, enlivened their amusements with an inexhaustible flow of wit and humor.
[The Pharaohs themselves, as well as their subjects, were in the habit of playing at draughts and other similar
games. Rosellini gives its Rameses playing with his daughter; see also two Egyptians playing together,
Wilkinson II. 419. An especially beautiful draught-board exists in the Egyptian collection at the Louvre
Museum. The Egyptians hoped to be permitted to enjoy these pleasures even in the other world.]
[Balls that have been found in the tombs are still to be seen; some, for instance, in the Museum at Leyden.]
"Really," said Bartja, as he watched Nitetis catching the slight hoop, ornamented with gay ribbons, for the
hundredth time on her slender ivory rod, "really we must introduce this game at home. We Persians are so
different from you Egyptians. Everything new has a special charm for us, while to you it is just as hateful. I
shall describe the game to Our mother Kassandane, and she will be delighted to allow my brother's wives this
new amusement."
"Yes, do, do!" exclaimed the fair Tachot blushing deeply. "Then Nitetis can play too, and fancy herself back
CHAPTER VII. 55
again at home and among those she loves; and Bartja," she added in a low voice, "whenever you watch the
hoops flying, you too must remember this hour."
"I shall never forget it," answered he with a smile, and then, turning to his future sister-in-law, he called out
cheerfully, "Be of good courage, Nitetis, you will be happier than you fancy with us. We Asiatics know how
to honor beauty; and prove it by taking many wives."
Nitetis sighed, and the queen Ladice exclaimed, "On the contrary, that very fact proves that you understand
but poorly how to appreciate woman's nature! You can have no idea, Bartja, what a woman feels on finding
that her husband--the man who to her is more than life itself, and to whom she would gladly and without
reserve give up all that she treasures as most sacred--looks down on her with the same kind of admiration that
he bestows on a pretty toy, a noble steed, or a well-wrought wine-bowl. But it is yet a thousand-fold more
painful to feel that the love which every woman has a right to possess for herself alone, must be shared with a
hundred others!"
"There speaks the jealous wife!" exclaimed Amasis. "Would you not fancy that I had often given her occasion
to doubt my faithfulness?"
"No, no, my husband," answered Ladice, "in this point the Egyptian men surpass other nations, that they
remain content with that which they have once loved; indeed I venture to assert that an Egyptian wife is the
happiest of women.
[According to Diodorus (I. 27) the queen of Egypt held a higher position than the king himself. The
monuments and lists of names certainly prove that women could rule with sovereign power. The husband of
the heiress to the throne became king. They had their own revenues (Diodorus I. 52) and when a princess,
after death, was admitted among the goddesses, she received her own priestesses. (Edict of Canopus.) During
the reigns of the Ptolemies many coins were stamped with the queen's image and cities were named for them.
We notice also that sons, in speaking of their descent, more frequently reckon it from the mother's than the
father's side, that a married woman is constantly alluded to as the "mistress" or "lady" of the house, that
according to many a Greek Papyrus they had entire disposal of all their property, no matter in what it
consisted, in short that the weaker sex seems to have enjoyed equal influence with the stronger.]
Even the Greeks, who in so many things may serve as patterns to us, do not know how to appreciate woman
rightly. Most of the young Greek girls pass their sad childhood in close rooms, kept to the wheel and the loom
by their mothers and those who have charge of them, and when marriageable, are transferred to the quiet
house of a husband they do not know, and whose work in life and in the state allows him but seldom to visit
his wife's apartments. Only when the most intimate friends and nearest relations are with her husband, does
she venture to appear in their midst, and then shyly and timidly, hoping to hear a little of what is going on in
the great world outside. Ah, indeed! we women thirst for knowledge too, and there are certain branches of
learning at least, which it cannot be right to withhold from those who are to be the mothers and educators of
the next generation. What can an Attic mother, without knowledge, without experience, give to her daughters?
Naught but her own ignorance. And so it is, that a Hellene, seldom satisfied with the society of his lawful, but,
mentally, inferior wife, turns for satisfaction to those courtesans, who, from their constant intercourse with
men, have acquired knowledge, and well understand how to adorn it with the flowers of feminine grace, and
to season it with the salt of a woman's more refined and delicate wit. In Egypt it is different. A young girl is
allowed to associate freely with the most enlightened men. Youths and maidens meet constantly on festive
occasions, learn to know and love one another. The wife is not the slave, but the friend of her husband; the
one supplies the deficiencies of the other. In weighty questions the stronger decides, but the lesser cares of life
are left to her who is the greater in small things. The daughters grow up under careful guidance, for the mother
is neither ignorant nor inexperienced. To be virtuous and diligent in her affairs becomes easy to a woman, for
she sees that it increases his happiness whose dearest possession she boasts of being, and who belongs to her
alone. The women only do that which pleases us! but the Egyptian men understand the art of making us
CHAPTER VII. 56
pleased with that which is really good, and with that alone. On the shores of the Nile, Phocylides of Miletus
and Hipponax of Ephesus would never have dared to sing their libels on women, nor could the fable of
Pandora have been possibly invented here!"
[Simonides of Amorgos, an Iambic poet, who delighted in writing satirical verses on women. He divides them
into different classes, which he compares to unclean animals, and considers that the only woman worthy of a
husband and able to make him happy must be like the bee. The well-known fable of Pandora owes its origin to
Simonides. He lived about 650 B. C. The Egyptians too, speak very severely of bad women, comparing them
quite in the Simonides style to beasts of prey (hyenas, lions and panthers). We find this sentence on a vicious
woman: She is a collection of every kind of meanness, and a bag full of wiles. Chabas, Papyr. magrque Harris.
p. 135. Phocylides of Miletus, a rough and sarcastic, but observant man, imitated Simonides in his style of
writing. But the deformed Hipponax of Ephesus, a poet crushed down by poverty, wrote far bitterer verses
than Phocylides. He lived about 550 B. C. "His own ugliness (according to Bernhardy) is reflected in every
one of his Choliambics." ]
"How beautifully you speak!" exclaimed Bartja. "Greek was not easy to learn, but I am very glad now that I
did not give it up in despair, and really paid attention to Croesus' lessons."
Who could those men have been," asked Darius, "who dared to speak evil of women?"
"A couple of Greek poets," answered Amasis, "the boldest of men, for I confess I would rather provoke a
lioness than a woman. But these Greeks do not know what fear is. I will give you a specimen of Hipponax's
Poetry:
"There are but two days when a wife, Brings pleasure to her husband's life, The wedding-day, when hopes are
bright, And the day he buries her out of his sight."
"Cease, cease," cried Ladice stopping her ears, that is too had. Now, Persians, you can see what manner of
man Amasis is. For the sake of a joke, he will laugh at those who hold precisely the same opinion as himself.
There could not be a better husband.
"Nor a worse wife," laughed Amasis. "Thou wilt make men think that I am a too obedient husband. But now
farewell, my children; our young heroes must look at this our city of Sais; before parting, however, I will
repeat to them what the malicious Siuionides has sung of a good wife:
"Dear to her spouse from youth to age she grows; Fills with fair girls and sturdy boys his house; Among all
women womanliest seems, And heavenly grace about her mild brow gleams. A gentle wife, a noble spouse
she walks, Nor ever with the gossip mongers talks. Such women sometimes Zeus to mortals gives, The glory
and the solace of their lives."
"Such is my Ladice! now farewell!"
"Not yet!" cried Bartja. "Let me first speak in defence of our poor Persia and instil fresh courage into my
future sister-in-law; but no! Darius, thou must speak, thine eloquence is as great as thy skill in figures and
swordsmanship!"
"Thou speakst of me as if I were a gossip or a shopkeeper,"--[This nickname, which Darius afterwards earned,
is more fully spoken of]-- answered the son of Hystaspes. "Be it so; I have been burning all this time to defend
the customs of our country. Know then, Ladice, that if Auramazda dispose the heart of our king in his own
good ways, your daughter will not be his slave, but his friend. Know also, that in Persia, though certainly only
at high festivals, the king's wives have their places at the men's table, and that we pay the highest reverence to
our wives and mothers. A king of Babylon once took a Persian wife; in the broad plains of the Euphrates she
CHAPTER VII. 57
fell sick of longing for her native mountains; he caused a gigantic structure to be raised on arches, and the
summit thereof to be covered with a depth of rich earth; caused the choicest trees and flowers to be planted
there, and watered by artificial machinery. This wonder completed, he led his wife thither; from its top she
could look down into the plains below, as from the heights of Rachined, and with this costly gift he presented
her. Tell me, could even an Egyptian give more?"
[This stupendous erection is said to have been constructed by Nebuchadnezzar for his Persian wife Amytis.
Curtius V. 5. Josephus contra Apion. I. 19. Antiquities X. II. 1. Diod. II. 10. For further particulars relative to
the hanging-gardens, see later notes.]
"And did she recover?" asked Nitetis, without raising her eyes.
"She recovered health and happiness; and you too will soon feel well and happy in our country."
"And now," said Ladice with a smile, what, think you, contributed most to the young queen's recovery? the
beautiful mountain or the love of the husband, who erected it for her sake?"
"Her husband's love," cried the young girls.
"But Nitetis would not disdain the mountain either," maintained Bartja, "and I shall make it my care that
whenever the court is at Babylon, she has the hanging-gardens for her residence."
"But now come," exclaimed Amasis, "unless you wish to see the city in darkness. Two secretaries have been
awaiting me yonder for the last two hours. Ho! Sachons! give orders to the captain of the guard to accompany
our noble guests with a hundred men."
"But why? a single guide, perhaps one of the Greek officers, would be amply sufficient."
"No, my young friends, it is better so. Foreigners can never be too prudent in Egypt. Do not forget this, and
especially be careful not to ridicule the sacred animals. And now farewell, my young heroes, till we meet
again this evening over a merry wine-cup."
The Persians then quitted the palace, accompanied by their interpreter, a Greek, but who had been brought up
in Egypt, and spoke both languages with equal facility.
[Psamtik I. is said to have formed a new caste, viz.: the caste of Interpreters, out of those Greeks who had
been born and bred up in Egypt. Herod. II. 154. Herodotus himself was probably conducted by such a
"Dragoman."]
Those streets of Sais which lay near the palace wore a pleasant aspect. The houses, many of which were five
stories high, were generally covered with pictures or hieroglyphics; galleries with balustrades of carved and
gaily-painted wood-work, supported by columns also brightly painted, ran round the walls surrounding the
courts. In many cases the proprietor's name and rank was to be read on the door, which was, however, well
closed and locked. Flowers and shrubs ornamented the flat roofs, on which the Egyptians loved to spend the
evening hours, unless indeed, they preferred ascending the mosquito-tower with which nearly every house
was provided. These troublesome insects, engendered by the Nile, fly low, and these little watch-towers were
built as a protection from them.
The young Persians admired the great, almost excessive cleanliness, with which each house, nay, even the
streets themselves, literally shone. The door-plates and knockers sparkled in the sun; paintings, balconies and
columns all had the appearance of having been only just finished, and even the street-pavement looked as if it
were often scoured.
CHAPTER VII. 58
[The streets of Egyptian towns seem to have been paved, judging from the ruins of Alabastron and Memphis.
We know at least with certainty that this was the case with those leading to the temples.]
But as the Persians left the neighborhood of the Nile and the palace, the streets became smaller. Sais was built
on the slope of a moderately high hill, and had only been the residence of the Pharaohs for two centuries and a
half, but, during that comparatively short interval, had risen from an unimportant place into a town of
considerable magnitude.
On its river-side the houses and streets were brilliant, but on the hill- slope lay, with but few more respectable
exceptions, miserable, poverty- stricken huts constructed of acacia-boughs and Nile-mud. On the north- west
rose the royal citadel.
"Let us turn back here," exclaimed Gyges to his young companions. During his father's absence he was
responsible as their guide and protector, and now perceived that the crowd of curious spectators, which had
hitherto followed them, was increasing at every step.
"I obey your orders," replied the interpreter, "but yonder in the valley, at the foot of that hill, lies the Saitic
city of the dead, and for foreigners I should think that would be of great interest."
"Go forward!" cried Bartja. "For what did we leave Persia, if not to behold these remarkable objects?"
On arriving at an open kind of square surrounded by workmen's booths, and not far from the city of the dead,
confused cries rose among the crowd behind them.
[Artisans, as well among the ancient as the modern Egyptians, were accustomed to work in the open air.]
The children shouted for joy, the women called out, and one voice louder than the rest was heard exclaiming:
"Come hither to the fore-court of the temple, and see the works of the great magician, who comes from the
western oases of Libya and is endowed with miraculous gifts by Chunsu, the giver of good counsels, and by
the great goddess Hekt."
"Follow me to the small temple yonder," said the interpreter, "and you will behold a strange spectacle." He
pushed a way for himself and the Persians through the crowd, obstructed in his course by many a sallow
woman and naked child; and at length came back with a priest, who conducted the strangers into the
fore-court of the temple. Here, surrounded by various chests and boxes, stood a man in the dress of a priest;
beside him on the earth knelt two negroes. The Libyan was a man of gigantic stature, with great suppleness of
limb and a pair of piercing black eyes. In his hand he held a wind-instrument resembling a modern clarionet,
and a number of snakes, known in Egypt to be poisonous, lay coiling themselves over his breast and arms.
On finding himself in the presence of the Persians he bowed low, inviting them by a solemn gesture to gaze at
his performances; he then cast off his white robe and began all kinds of tricks with the snakes.
He allowed them to bite him, till the blood trickled down his cheeks; compelled them by the notes of his flute
to assume an erect position and perform a kind of dancing evolution; by spitting into their jaws he
transformed them to all appearance into motionless rods; and then, dashing them all on to the earth, performed
a wild dance in their midst, yet without once touching a single snake.
Like one possessed, he contorted his pliant limbs until his eyes seemed starting from his head and a bloody
foam issued from his lips.
Suddenly he fell to the ground, apparently lifeless. A slight movement of the lips and a low hissing whistle
were the only signs of life; but, on hearing the latter, the snakes crept up and twined themselves like living
CHAPTER VII. 59
rings around his neck, legs and body. At last he rose, sang a hymn in praise of the divine power which had
made him a magician, and then laid the greater number of his snakes in one of the chests, retaining a few,
probably his favorites, to serve as ornaments for his neck and arms.
The second part of this performance consisted of clever conjuring-tricks, in which he swallowed burning flax,
balanced swords while dancing, their points standing in the hollow of his eye; drew long strings and ribbons
out of the noses of the Egyptian children, exhibited the well-known cup- and-ball trick, and, at length, raised
the admiration of the spectators to its highest pitch, by producing five living rabbits from as many
ostrich-eggs.
The Persians formed no unthankful portion of the assembled crowd; on the contrary, this scene, so totally
new, impressed them deeply.
They felt as if in the realm of miracles, and fancied they had now seen the rarest of all Egyptian rarities. In
silence they took their way back to the handsomer streets of Sais, without noticing how many mutilated
Egyptians crossed their path. These poor disfigured creatures were indeed no unusual sight for Asiatics, who
punished many crimes by the amputation of a limb. Had they enquired however, they would have heard that,
in Egypt, the man deprived of his hand was a convicted forger, the woman of her nose, an adulteress; that the
man without a tongue had been found guilty of high treason or false witness; that the loss of the ears denoted a
spy, and that the pale, idiotic-looking woman yonder had been guilty of infanticide, and had been condemned
to hold the little corpse three days and three nights in her arms. What woman could retain her senses after
these hours of torture?--[Diodorus I. 77.]
The greater number of the Egyptian penal laws not only secured the punishment of the criminal, but rendered
a repetition of the offence impossible.
The Persian party now met with a hindrance, a large crowd having assembled before one of the handsomest
houses in the street leading to the temple of Neith. The few windows of this house that could be seen (the
greater number opening on the garden and court) were closed with shutters, and at the door stood an old man,
dressed in the plain white robe of a priest's servant. He was endeavoring, with loud cries, to prevent a number
of men of his own class from carrying a large chest out of the house.
"What right have you to rob my master?" he shrieked indignantly. "I am the guardian of this house, and when
my master left for Persia (may the gods destroy that land!) he bade me take especial care of this chest in
which his manuscripts lay."
"Compose yourself, old Hib!" shouted one of these inferior priests, the same whose acquaintance we made on
the arrival of the Asiatic Embassy. "We are here in the name of the high-priest of the great Neith, your
master's master. There must be queer papers in this box, or Neithotep would not have honored us with his
commands to fetch them."
"But I will not allow my master's papers to be stolen," shrieked the old man. "My master is the great physician
Nebenchari, and I will secure his rights, even if I must appeal to the king himself."
"There," cried the other, "that will do; out with the chest, you fellows. Carry it at once to the high-priest; and
you, old man, would do more wisely to hold your tongue and remember that the high-priest is your master as
well as mine. Get into the house as quick as you can, or to- morrow we shall have to drag you off as we did
the chest to-day!" So saying, he slammed the heavy door, the old man was flung backward into the house and
the crowd saw him no more.
The Persians had watched this scene and obtained an explanation of its meaning from their interpreter.
Zopyrus laughed on hearing that the possessor of the stolen chest was the oculist Nebenchari, the same who
CHAPTER VII. 60
had been sent to Persia to restore the sight of the king's mother, and whose grave, even morose temper had
procured him but little love at the court of Cambyses.
Bartja wished to ask Amasis the meaning of this strange robbery, but Gyges begged him not to interfere in
matters with which he had no concern. Just as they reached the palace, and darkness, which in Egypt so
quickly succeeds the daylight, was already stealing over the city, Gyges felt himself hindered from proceeding
further by a firm hand on his robe, and perceived a stranger holding his finger on his lips in token of silence.
"When can I speak with you alone and unobserved?" he whispered.
"What do you wish from me?"
"Ask no questions, but answer me quickly. By Mithras," I have weighty matters to disclose."
"You speak Persian, but your garments would proclaim you an Egyptian."
"I am a Persian, but answer me quickly or we shall be noticed. When can I speak to you alone?"
"To-morrow morning."
"That is too late."
"Well then, in a quarter of an hour, when it is quite dark, at this gate of the palace."
"I shall expect you."
So saying the man vanished. Once within the palace, Gyges left Bartja and Zopyrus, fastened his sword into
his girdle, begged Darius to do the same and to follow him, and was soon standing again under the great
portico with the stranger, but this time in total darkness.
"Auramazda be praised that you are there!" cried the latter in Persian to the young Lydian; "but who is that
with you?"
"Darius, the son of Hystaspes, one of the Achaemenidae; and my friend."
The stranger bowed low and answered, "It is well, I feared an Egyptian had accompanied you."
"No, we are alone and willing to hear you; but be brief. Who are you and what do you want?"
"My name is Bubares. I served as a poor captain under the great Cyrus. At the taking of your father's city,
Sardis, the soldiers were at first allowed to plunder freely; but on your wise father's representing to Cyrus that
to plunder a city already taken was an injury to the present, and not to the former, possessor, they were
commanded on pain of death to deliver up their booty to their captains, and the latter to cause everything of
worth, when brought to them, to be collected in the market- place. Gold and silver trappings lay there in
abundance, costly articles of attire studded with precious stones . . ."
"Quick, quick, our time is short," interrupted Gyges.
"You are right. I must be more brief. By keeping for myself an ointment-box sparkling with jewels, taken
from your father's palace, I forfeited my life. Croesus, however, pleaded for me with his conqueror Cyrus; my
life and liberty were granted me, but I was declared a dishonored man. Life in Persia became impossible with
disgrace lying heavily on my soul; I took ship from Smyrna to Cyprus, entered the army there, fought against
CHAPTER VII. 61
Amasis, and was brought hither by Phanes as a prisoner-of-war. Having always served as a horse-soldier, I
was placed among those slaves who had charge of the king's horses, and in six years became an overseer.
Never have I forgotten the debt of gratitude I owe to your father; and now my turn has come to render him a
service."
"The matter concerns my father? then speak--tell me, I beseech you!"
"Immediately. Has Croesus offended the crown prince?"
"Not that I am aware of."
"Your father is on a visit to Rhodopis this evening, at Naukratis?"
"How did you hear this?"
"From himself. I followed him to the boat this morning and sought to cast myself at his feet."
"And did you succeed?"
"Certainly. He spoke a few gracious words with me, but could not wait to hear what I would say, as his
companions were already on board when he arrived. His slave Sandon, whom I know, told me that they were
going to Naukratis, and would visit the Greek woman whom they call Rhodopis."
"He spoke truly."
"Then you must speed to the rescue. At the time that the market-place was full."
[The forenoon among the Greeks was regulated by the business of the market. "When the market-place begins
to fill, when it is full, when it becomes empty." It would be impossible to define this division of time exactly
according to our modern methods of computation, but it seems certain that the market was over by the
afternoon. The busiest hours were probably from 10 till 1. At the present day the streets of Athens are
crowded during those hours; but in Summer from two to four o'clock are utterly deserted.]
"Ten carriages and two boats, full of Ethiopian soldiers under the command of an Egyptian captain, were sent
off to Naukratis to surround the house of Rhodopis and make captives of her guests."
"Ha, treachery!" exclaimed Gyges.
"But how can they wish to injure your father?" said Darius. "They know that the vengeance of Cambyses--"
"I only know," repeated Bubares, "that this night the house of Rhodopis, in which your father is, will be
surrounded by Ethiopian soldiers. I myself saw to the horses which transport them thither and heard Pentaur,
one of the crown-prince's fan-bearers, call to them, 'Keep eyes and ears open, and let the house of Rhodopis
be surrounded, lest he should escape by the back door. If possible spare his life, and kill him only if he resist.
Bring him alive to Sais, and you shall receive twenty rings of gold.'"
[It is no longer a matter of question, that before the time of the Persians, and therefore at this point of our
history, no money had been coined in Egypt. The precious metals were weighed out and used as money in the
shape of rings, animals, etc. On many of the monuments we see people purchasing goods and weighing out
the gold in payment; while others are paying their tribute in gold rings. These rings were in use as a medium
of payment up to the time of the Ptolemies. Pliny XXXIII. I. Balances with weights in the form of animals
may be seen in Wilkinson. During the reigns of the Ptolemies many coins were struck.]
CHAPTER VII. 62
"But could that allude to my father?"
"Certainly not," cried Darius.
"It is impossible to say," murmured Bubares. "In this country one can never know what may happen."
"How long does it take for a good horse to reach Naukratis?"
"Three hours, if he can go so long, and the Nile has not overflowed the road too much."
"I will be there in two."
"I shall ride with you," said Darius.
"No, you must remain here with Zopyrus for Bartja's protection. Tell the servants to get ready."
"But Gyges--"
"Yes, you will stay here and excuse me to Amasis. Say I could not come to the evening revel on account of
headache, toothache, sickness, anything you like."
"I shall ride Bartja's Nicaean horse; and you, Bubares, will follow me on Darius's. You will lend him, my
brother?"
"If I had ten thousand, you should have them all."
"Do you know the way to Naukratis, Bubares?"
"Blindfold."
"Then go, Darius, and tell them to get your horse and Bartja's ready! To linger would be sin. Farewell Darius,
perhaps forever! Protect Bartja! Once more, farewell!"
CHAPTER VIII.
It wanted two hours of midnight. Bright light was streaming through the open windows of Rhodopis' house,
and sounds of mirth and gaiety fell on the ear. Her table had been adorned with special care in Croesus' honor.
On the cushions around it lay the guests with whom we are already acquainted: Theodorus, Ibykus, Phanes,
Aristomachus, the merchant Theopompus of Miletus, Croesus and others, crowned with chaplets of poplar
and roses.
Theodorus the sculptor was speaking: "Egypt seems to me," he said, "like a girl who persists in wearing a
tight and painful shoe only because it is of gold, while within her reach he beautiful and well-fitting slippers
in which she could move at ease, if she only would."
"You refer to the Egyptians' pertinacity in retaining traditional forms and customs?" asked Croesus.
"Certainly I do," answered the sculptor. "Two centuries ago Egypt was unquestionably the first of the nations.
In Art and Science she far excelled us; but we learnt their methods of working, improved on them, held firm
to no prescribed proportions, but to the natural types alone, gave freedom and beauty to their unbending
CHAPTER VIII. 63
outlines, and now have left our masters far behind us. But how was this possible? simply because the
Egyptians, bound by unalterable laws, could make no progress; we, on the contrary, were free to pursue our
course in the wide arena of art as far as will and power would allow."
"But how can an artist be compelled to fashion statues alike, which are meant to differ from each other in
what they represent?"
"In this case that can be easily explained. The entire human body is divided by the Egyptians into 21 1/4 parts,
in accordance with which division the proportion of each separate limb is regulated. I, myself, have laid a
wager with Amasis, in presence of the first Egyptian sculptor, (a priest of Thebes), that, if I send my brother
Telekles, in Ephesus, dimensions, proportion and attitude, according to the Egyptian method, he and I
together can produce a statue which shall look as if sculptured from one block and by one hand, though
Telekles is to carve the lower half at Ephesus, and I the upper here in Sais, and under the eye of Amasis."
[These numbers, and the story which immediately follows, are taken from Diodorus I. 98. Plato tells us that,
in his time, a law existed binding the Egyptian artists to execute their works with exactly the same amount of
beauty or its reverse, as those which had been made more than a thousand years before. This statement is
confirmed by the monuments; but any one well acquainted with Egyptian art can discern a marked difference
in the style of each epoch. At the time of the ancient kingdom the forms were compressed and stunted; under
Seti I. beauty of proportion reached its highest point. During, and after the 20th dynasty, the style declined in
beauty; in the 26th, under the descendants of Psammetichus, we meet with a last revival of art, but the ancient
purity of form was never again attained.]
"And shall you win your wager?"
"Undoubtedly. I am just going to begin this trick of art; it will as little deserve the name of a work of art, as
any Egyptian statue."
"And yet there are single sculptures here which are of exquisite workmanship; such, for instance, as the one
Amasis sent to Samos as a present to Polykrates. In Memphis I saw a statue said to be about three thousand
years old, and to represent a king who built the great Pyramid, which excited my admiration in every respect.
With what certainty and precision that unusually hard stone has been wrought! the muscles, how carefully
carved! especially in the breast, legs and feet; the harmony of the features too, and, above all, the polish of the
whole, leave nothing to be desired."
"Unquestionably. In all the mechanism of art, such as precision and certainty in working even the hardest
materials, the Egyptians, though they have so long stood still in other points, are still far before us; but to
model form with freedom, to breathe, like Prometheus, a soul into the stone, they will never learn until their
old notions on this subject have been entirely abandoned. Even the pleasing varieties of corporeal life cannot
be represented by a system of mere proportions, much less those which are inner and spiritual. Look at the
countless statues which have been erected during the last three thousand years, in all the temples and palaces
from Naukratis up to the Cataracts. They are all of one type, and represent men of middle age, with grave but
benevolent countenances. Yet they are intended, some as statues of aged monarchs, others to perpetuate the
memory of young princes. The warrior and the lawgiver, the blood-thirsty tyrant and the philanthropist are
only distinguished from each other by a difference in size, by which the Egyptian sculptor expresses the idea
of power and strength. Amasis orders a statue just as I should a sword. Breadth and length being specified, we
both of us know quite well, before the master has begun his work, what we shall receive when it is finished.
How could I possibly fashion an infirm old man like an eager youth? a pugilist like a runner in the foot-race?
a poet like a warrior? Put Ibykus and our Spartan friend side by side, and tell me what you would say, were I
to give to the stern warrior the gentle features and gestures of our heart-ensnaring poet."
"Well, and how does Amasis answer your remarks on this stagnation in art?"
CHAPTER VIII. 64
"He deplores it; but does not feel himself strong enough to abolish the restrictive laws of the priests."
"And yet," said the Delphian, "he has given a large sum towards the embellishment of our new temple,
expressly, (I use his own words) for the promotion of Hellenic art!"
"That is admirable in him," exclaimed Croesus. "Will the Alkmaeonidae soon have collected the three
hundred talents necessary for the completion of the temple? Were I as rich as formerly I would gladly
undertake the entire cost; notwithstanding that your malicious god so cruelly deceived me, after all my
offerings at his shrine. For when I sent to ask whether I should begin the war with Cyrus, he returned this
answer: I should destroy a mighty kingdom by crossing the river Halys. I trusted the god, secured the
friendship of Sparta according to his commands, crossed the boundary stream, and, in so doing, did indeed
destroy a mighty kingdom; not however that of the Medes and Persians, but my own poor Lydia, which, as a
satrapy of Cambyses, finds its loss of independence a hard and uncongenial yoke."
"You blame the god unjustly," answered Phryxus. It cannot be his fault that you, in your human conceit,
should have misinterpreted his oracle. The answer did not say 'the kingdom of Persia,' but 'a kingdom' should
be destroyed through your desire for war. Why did you not enquire what kingdom was meant? Was not your
son's fate truly prophesied by the oracle? and also that on the day of misfortune he would regain his speech?
And when, after the fall of Sardis, Cyrus granted your wish to enquire at Delphi whether the Greek gods made
a rule of requiting their benefactors by ingratitude, Loxias answered that he had willed the best for you, but
was controlled by a mightier power than himself, by that inexorable fate which had foretold to thy great
ancestor, that his fifth successor was doomed to destruction."
"In the first days of my adversity I needed those words far more than now," interrupted Croesus. "There was a
time when I cursed your god and his oracles; but later, when with my riches my flatterers had left me, and I
became accustomed to pronounce judgment on my own actions, I saw clearly that not Apollo, but my own
vanity had been the cause of my ruin. How could 'the kingdom to be destroyed' possibly mean mine, the
mighty realm of the powerful Croesus, the friend of the gods, the hitherto unconquered leader? Had a friend
hinted at this interpretation of the ambiguous oracle, I should have derided, nay, probably caused him to be
punished. For a despotic ruler is like a fiery steed; the latter endeavors to kick him who touches his wounds
with intent to heal; the former punishes him who lays a hand on the weak or failing points of his diseased
mind. Thus I missed what, if my eyes had not been dazzled, I might easily have seen; and now that my vision
is clearer, though I have nothing to lose, I am far more often anxious than in the days when none could
possibly lose more than I. In comparison with those days, Phryxus, I may be called a poor man now, but
Cambyses does not leave me to famish, and I can still raise a talent for your temple."
Phryxus expressed his thanks, and Phanes remarked "The Alkmaeonida; will be sure to erect a beautiful
edifice, for they are rich and ambitious, and desirous of gaining favor with the Amphiktyons, in order, by their
aid, to overthrow the tyrants, secure to themselves a higher position than that of the family to which I belong,
and with this, the guidance of state-affairs."
"Is it true, as people say," asked Ibykus, "that next to Agarista with whom Megakles received so rich a dowry,
you, Croesus, have been the largest contributor to the wealth of the Alkmaeonidae?"
"True enough," answered Croesus laughing.
"Tell us the story, I beg," said Rhodopis.
"Well," answered Croesus, "Alkmaeon of Athens once appeared at my court; his cheerfulness and cultivation
pleased me well, and I retained him near me for some time. One day I showed him my treasure-chambers, at
the sight of which he fell into despair, called himself a common beggar and declared that one good handful of
these precious things would make him a happy man. I at once allowed him to take as much gold away as he
CHAPTER VIII. 65
could carry. What think you did Alkaemmon on this? sent for high Lydian riding-boots, an apron and a
basket, had the one secured behind him, put the others on, and filled them all with gold, till they could hold no
more. Not content with this, he strewed gold-dust in his hair and beard and filled his mouth to that extent that
he appeared in the act of choking. In each hand he grasped a golden dish, and thus laden dragged himself out
of the treasure-house, falling exhausted as he crossed the threshold. Never have I laughed so heartily as at this
sight."
"But did you grant him all these treasures?" said Rhodopis.
"Yes, yes, my friend; and did not think even then, that I had paid too dearly for the experience that gold can
make fools even of clever men."
"You were the most generous of monarchs," cried Phanes.
"And make a tolerably contented beggar," answered Croesus. "But tell me, Phryxus, how much has Amasis
contributed to your collection?"
"He gave fifty tons of alum."
"A royal gift!"
"And the prince Psamtik?"
"On my appealing to him by his father's munificence, he turned his back on me, and answered with a bitter
laugh: 'Collect money for the destruction of your temple, and I am ready to double my father's donation!'"
"The wretch!"
"Say rather: the true Egyptian! to Psamtik everything foreign is an abomination."
"How much have the Greeks in Naukratis contributed?"
"Beside munificent private donations, each community has given twenty minae."
"That is much."
"Philoinus, the Sybarite, alone sent me a thousand drachmm," and accompanied his gift with a most singular
epistle. May I read it aloud, Rhodopis?"
"Certainly," answered she, "it will show you that the drunkard has repented of his late behaviour."
The Delphian began: "Philoinus to Phryxus: It grieves me that at Rhodopis' house the other night I did not
drink more; for had I done so I should have lost consciousness entirely, and so have been unable to offend
even the smallest insect. My confounded abstemiousness is therefore to blame, that I can no longer enjoy a
place at the best table in all Egypt. I am thankful, however, to Rhodopis for past enjoyment, and in memory of
her glorious roastbeef (which has bred in me the wish to buy her cook at any price) I send twelve large spits
for roasting oxen, --[Rhodopis is said to have sent such a gift to Delphi. Herod.]--and beg they may be placed
in some treasure-house at Delphi as an offering from Rhodopis. As for myself, being a rich man, I sign my
name for a thousand drachmae, and beg that my gift may be publicly announced at the next Pythian games. To
that rude fellow, Aristomachus of Sparta, express my thanks for the effectual manner in which he fulfilled my
intention in coming to Egypt. I came hither for the purpose of having a tooth extracted by an Egyptian dentist
said to take out teeth without causing much pain.
CHAPTER VIII. 66
[The Egyptian dentists must have been very skilful. Artificial teeth have been discovered in the jaws of
mummies. See Blumenbach on the teeth of the ancient Egyptians, and on mummies.]
Aristomachus, however, knocked out the defective tooth and so saved me from an operation, the thought of
which had often made me tremble. On recovering consciousness, I found that three teeth had been knocked
into my mouth, the diseased one and two others, which though healthy, would probably at some future time
have caused me pain. Salute Rhodopis and the handsome Phanes from me. You I invite to an entertainment at
my house in Sybaris, this day year. We are accustomed to issue invitations somewhat early, on account of my
necessary preparations. I have caused this epistle to be written by my slave Sophotatus in an adjoining
chamber, as merely to behold the labor of writing causes cramp in my fingers."
A burst of laughter arose at these words, but Rhodopis said: "This letter gives me pleasure; it proves that
Philoinus is not bad at heart. Brought up a Sybarite" . . . She was suddenly interrupted by the voice of a
stranger, who had entered unperceived, and, after apologizing to the venerable hostess and her guests for
appearing without invitation among them, continued thus: "I am Gyges the son of Croesus; and it has not been
merely for pastime, that I have ridden over from Sais in two hours lest I should arrive too late!"
"Menon, a cushion for our guest!" cried Rhodopis. "Be welcome to my house and take some repose after your
wild, thoroughly Lydian, ride."
"By the dog, Gyges!" exclaimed Croesus.
[An oath of Rhadamanthus used in order to avoid mentioning the names of the gods. Schol. Aristoph. Aves.
520.]
"What brings thee here at this hour? I begged thee not to quit Bartja's side . . . But how thou look'st! what is
the matter? has aught happened? speak, speak!"
In the first moment Gyges could not answer a word. To see his beloved father, for whose very life he had been
in such anxiety, a safe and happy guest at this rich banquet, seemed to rob him of his speech a second time. At
last, however, he was able to say: "The gods be praised, my father, that I see thee safe once more! Think not I
forsook my post thoughtlessly. Alas! I am forced to appear as a bird of evil omen in this cheerful assembly.
Know at once, ye guests, for I dare not lose time in preparing my words, that a treacherous assault awaits ye!"
They all sprang up as if struck by lightning. Aristomachus silently loosened his sword in its scabbard; Phanes
extended his arms as if to discern whether the old athletic elasticity still dwelt there.
"What can it be?--what is their design?" echoed from all sides.
"This house is surrounded by Ethiopian soldiers!" answered Gyges. "A faithful fellow confided to me that the
crown-prince had designs on one of your number; he was to be taken alive if possible, but killed if he resisted.
Dreading lest thou shouldst be this victim, my father, I sped hither. The fellow had not lied. This house is
surrounded. My horse shied on reaching your garden-gate, Rhodopis, jaded as he was. I dismounted, and
could discern behind every bush the glitter of weapons and the eager eyes of men lying in ambush. They
allowed us, however, to enter unmolested."
At this moment Knakias rushed in crying, "Important news! On my way to the Nile to fetch water with which
to prepare the wine-cup, I have just met a man who, in his haste, nearly ran over me.
[The water of the Nile has a very agreeable flavor. It is called by one traveller the champagne among the
waters. The ladies of the Sultan's harem send for this water even from Constantinople, and the Arabs say, that
if Mahomet had drunk thereof he would have desired to live for ever.]
CHAPTER VIII. 67
It was an Ethiop, one of Phanes' boatmen, and he tells that just as he sprang out of the boat to bathe, a royal
bark came alongside and a soldier asked the rest of the crew in whose service they were. On the helmsman
answering, 'in Phanes' service,' the royal boat passed on slowly. He, however, (the rower who was bathing),
seated himself in fun on the rudder of the royal boat, and heard one Ethiopian soldier on board say to another,
'Keep that craft well in sight; now we know where the bird sits, and it will be easy to catch him. Remember,
Psamtik has promised us fifty gold rings if we bring the Athenian to Sais dead or alive.' This is the report of
Sebek, who has been in your service seven years, O Phanes."
To both these accounts Phanes listened calmly. Rhodopis trembled. Aristomachus exclaimed, "Not a hair of
your head shall be touched, if Egypt perish for it!" Croesus advised prudence. A tremendous excitement had
mastered the whole party.
At last Phanes broke silence, saying: "Reflection is never more necessary than in a time of danger. I have
thought the matter over, and see clearly that escape will be difficult. The Egyptians will try to get rid of me
quietly. They know that I intend going on board a Phoecean trireme, which sets sail for Sigeum at a very early
hour to-morrow morning, and have therefore no time to lose, if they will seize me. Your garden, Rhodopis, is
entirely surrounded, and were I to remain here, your house would no longer be respected as a sanctuary; it
would be searched and I taken in it. There can be no doubt that a watch has been set over the Phoecean ship
also. Blood shall not be shed in vain on my account."
"But you dare not surrender!" cried Aristomachus.
"No, no, I have a plan," shouted Theopompus the Milesian merchant. "At sunrise to-morrow a ship sails for
Miletus laden with Egyptian corn, but not from Naukratis, from Canopus. Take the noble Persian's horse and
ride thither. We will cut a way for you through the garden."
"But," said Gyges, "our little band is not strong enough to carry out such an attempt. We number in all ten
men, and of these only three have swords; our enemies, on the other hand, number at least a hundred, and are
armed to the teeth."
"Lydian!" cried Aristomachus, "wert thou ten times more fainthearted than thou art, and were our enemies
double their number, I at least, will fight them!"
Phanes grasped his friend's hand. Gyges turned pale. This brave warrior had called him fainthearted; and
again he could find no words to answer; for at every stirring emotion his tongue failed him. Suddenly the
blood mounted to his face; his words came quickly and with decision: "Athenian, follow me! and thou,
Spartan, who art not wont to use words heedlessly, call no man fainthearted again before thou knowest him.
Friends, Phanes is safe, Farewell, father!"
The remaining guests surveyed these two departing men in silent wonder. As they stood there, silently
listening, the sound of two horses galloping swiftly away fell on their ear, and after a longer interval a
prolonged whistle from the Nile and a cry of distress.
"Where is Knakias?" said Rhodopis to one of her slaves.
"He went into the garden with Phanes and the Persian," was the answer, and as it was being spoken, the old
slave re-entered, pale and trembling.
"Have you seen my son?" cried Croesus. "Where is Phanes?"
"I was to bid you farewell from them both."
CHAPTER VIII. 68
"Then they are gone.--Whither? How was it possible?" . . .
"The Athenian and the Persian," began the slave, "had a slight dispute in the anteroom. This over, I was told
to divest both of their robes. Phanes then put on the stranger's trousers, coat and girdle; on his own curls he
placed the pointed Persian cap. The stranger wrapped himself in the Athenian's chiton and mantle, placed the
golden circlet above his brow, caused the hair to be shaved from his upper lip, and ordered me to follow him
into the garden. Phanes, whom in his present dress, none could imagine to be other than a Persian, mounted
one of the horses still waiting before the gate; the stranger called after him, 'Farewell Gyges, farewell beloved
Persian, a pleasant journey to thee, Gyges!' The servant, who had been waiting, followed on the other horse. I
could hear the clatter of arms among the bushes, but the Athenian was allowed to depart unmolested, the
soldiers, without doubt, believing him to be a Persian.
"On returning to the house the stranger's orders were: 'Accompany me to Phanes' bark, and cease not to call
me by the Athenian's name.' 'But the boatmen will betray you,' I said. 'Then go alone to them,' he answered,
'and command them to receive me as their master, Phanes.' Then I prayed him to allow me to take the dress of
the fugitive and become a prey to the pursuers; but he would by no means allow this, and said my gait and
carriage would betray me. There alas! he spoke truly, for only the free man can walk erect; the neck of the
slave is bent; the schools in which the noble and the freeborn learn grace and beauty of movement are not for
him. And so it must remain, the children must be even as the fathers; can the unclean onion-root produce a
rose, or the unsightly radish a hyacinth? Constant bondage bows the neck of the slave, but the consciousness
of freedom gives dignity to the stature."
"But what has become of my son?" interrupted Croesus.
"He would not accept my poor offer, and took his seat in the bark, sending a thousand greetings unto thee, O
king! I cried after him, 'Farewell Phanes! I wish thee a prosperous journey, Phanes!' At that moment a cloud
crossed the moon; and from out the thick darkness I heard screams, and cries for help; they did not, however,
last long, a shrill whistle followed, then all was silent; and the measured strokes of oars were the only sounds
that fell on my ear. I was on the point of returning to relate what I had seen, when the boatman Sebek swam
up once more and told as follows: The Egyptians had caused a leak to be made in Phanes' boat, and at a short
distance from land it had filled and began to sink. On the boatmen crying for help, the royal bark, which was
following, had come up and taken the supposed Phanes on board, but had prevented the rowers from leaving
their benches. They all went down with the leaking boat, the daring Sebek alone excepted. Gyges is on board
the royal boat; Phanes has escaped, for that whistle must have been intended for the soldiers in ambush at the
garden-gate. I searched the bushes, the soldiers were gone, and I could hear the sound of their voices and
weapons on their way back to Sais."
The guests listened with eager attention to this tale. At its close a mingled feeling of relief and anxiety was felt
by all; relief that their favorite companion had escaped so fearful a danger, anxiety for the brave young Lydian
who had risked his life to save him. They praised his generosity, congratulated Croesus on possessing such a
son, and finally agreed in the conclusion, that, when the crown-prince discovered the error into which his
emissaries had fallen, he must certainly release Gyges, and even make him compensation for what he had
suffered at their hands.
The friendship already shown by Amasis, and the fear in which he evidently stood of the Persian power, were
the thoughts which had power to calm Croesus, who soon left, in order to pass the night at the house of
Theopompus, the Milesian merchant. At parting, Aristomachus said: "Salute Gyges in my name; tell him I ask
his forgiveness, and hope one day either to enjoy his friendship, or, if that cannot be, to meet him as a fair foe
on the field of battle."
"Who knows what the future may bring?" answered Croesus giving his hand to the Spartan.
CHAPTER VIII. 69
CHAPTER IX.
The sun of a new day had risen over Egypt, but was still low in the east; the copious dew, which, on the Nile,
supplies the place of rain, lay sparkling like jewels on the leaves and blossoms, and the morning air, freshened
by a north-west wind, invited those to enjoy it who could not bear the heat of mid-day.
Through the door of the country-house, now so well known to us, two female figures have just passed;
Melitta, the old slave, and Sappho, the grandchild of Rhodopis.
The latter is not less lovely now, than when we saw her last, asleep. She moves through the garden with a light
quick step, her white morning robe with its wide sleeves falling in graceful drapery over her lithe limbs, the
thick brown hair straying from beneath the purple kerchief over her head, and a merry, roguish smile lurking
round her rosy mouth and in the dimples of her cheeks and chin.
She stooped to pick a rose, dashed the dew from it into the face of her old nurse, laughing at her naughty trick
till the clear bell-like tones rang through the garden; fixed the flower in her dress and began to sing in a
wonderfully rich and sweet voice--
Cupid once upon a bed Of roses laid his weary head; Luckless urchin! not to see Within the leaves a
slumbering bee. The bee awak'd--with anger wild The bee awak'd, and stung the child. Loud and piteous are
his cries; To Venus quick he runs, he flies; "Oh mother! I am wounded through-- "I die with pain--in sooth I
do! "Stung by some little angry thing. "Some serpent on a tiny wing, "A bee it was--for once, I know, "I heard
a rustic call it so."
"Isn't that a very pretty song?" asked the laughing girl. "How stupid of little Eros to mistake a bee for a
winged snake! Grandmother says that the great poet Anacreon wrote another verse to this song, but she will
not teach it me. Tell me, Melitta, what can there be in that verse? There, you are smiling; dear, darling Melitta,
do sing me that one verse. Perhaps though, you don't know it yourself? No? then certainly you can't teach it
me."
"That is a new song," answered the old woman, evading her darling's question, "I only know the songs of the
good old times. But hark! did not you hear a knock at the gate?"
[The last lines which contain the point of this song are:
Thus he spoke, and she, the while, Heard him with a soothing smile; Then said, "My infant, if so much "Thou
feel the little wild bee's touch, "How must the heart, ah! Cupid be, "The hapless heart that's stung by thee?"
--Translation from one of Anacreon's songs]
"Yes, of course I did, and I think the sound of horses' hoofs too. Go and see who seeks admission so early.
Perhaps, after all, our kind Phanes did not go away yesterday, and has come to bid us farewell once more."
"Phanes is gone," said Melitta, becoming serious, "and Rhodopis has ordered me to send you in when visitors
arrive. Go child, that I may open the gate. There, they have knocked again."
Sappho pretended to run in, but instead of obeying her nurse's orders, stopped and hid herself behind a
rose-bush, hoping to catch sight of these early guests. In the fear of needlessly distressing her, she had not
been told of the events of the previous evening, and at this early hour could only expect to see some very
intimate friend of her grandmother's.
Melitta opened the gate and admitted a youth splendidly apparelled, and with fair curling hair.
CHAPTER IX. 70
It was Bartja, and Sappho was so lost in wonder at his beauty, and the Persian dress, to her so strange, that she
remained motionless in her hiding-place, her eyes fixed on his face. Just so she had pictured to herself Apollo
with the beautiful locks, guiding the sun-chariot.
As Melitta and the stranger came nearer she thrust her little head through the roses to hear what the handsome
youth was saying so kindly in his broken Greek.
She heard him ask hurriedly after Croesus and his son; and then, from Melitta's answer, she gathered all that
had passed the evening before, trembled for Phanes, felt so thankful to the generous Gyges, and again
wondered who this youth in royal apparel could possibly be. Rhodopis had told her about Cyrus's heroic
deeds, the fall of Croesus and the power and wealth of the Persians, but still she had always fancied them a
wild, uncultivated people. Now, however, her interest in Persia increased with every look at the handsome
Bartja. At last Melitta went in to wake her grandmother and announce the guest, and Sappho tried to follow
her, but Eros, the foolish boy whose ignorance she had been mocking a moment before, had other intentions.
Her dress caught in the thorns, and before she could disengage it, the beautiful Bartja was standing before her,
helping her to get free from the treacherous bush.
Sappho could not speak a word even of thanks; she blushed deeply, and stood smiling and ashamed, with
downcast eyes.
Bartja, too, generally so full of fun and spirit, looked down at her without speaking, the color mounting to his
cheeks.
The silence, however, did not last long, for Sappho, recovering from her fright, burst into a laugh of childish
delight at the silent stranger and the odd scene, and fled towards the house like a timid fawn.
In a moment Bartja was himself again; in two strides he reached the young girl, quick as thought seized her
hand and held it fast, notwithstanding all her struggles.
"Let me go!" she cried half in earnest and half laughing, raising her dark eyes appealingly to him.
"Why should I?" he answered. "I took you from the rose-bush and shall hold you fast until you give me your
sister there, the other rose, from your bosom, to take home with me as a keepsake."
"Please let me go," repeated Sappho, "I will promise nothing unless you let my hand go."
"But if I do, you will not run away again?"
"Certainly not."
"Well, then, I will give you your liberty, but now you must give me your rose."
"There are plenty on the bush yonder, and more beautiful ones; choose whichever you like. Why do you want
just this one?"
"To keep it carefully in remembrance of the most beautiful maiden I ever saw."
"Then I shall certainly not give it to you; for those are not my real friends who tell me I am beautiful, only
those who tell me I am good."
"Where did you learn that?"
CHAPTER IX. 71
"From my grandmother Rhodopis."
"Very well, then I will tell you you are better than any other maiden in the whole world."
"How can you say such things, when you don't know me at all? Oh, sometimes I am very naughty and
disobedient. If I were really good I should be indoors now instead of talking to you here. My grandmother has
forbidden me ever to stay in the garden when visitors are here, and indeed I don't care for all those strange
men who always talk about things I cannot understand."
"Then perhaps you would like me to go away too?"
"Oh no, I can understand you quite well; though you cannot speak half so beautifully as our poor Phanes for
example, who was obliged to escape so miserably yesterday evening, as I heard Melitta saying just this
minute."
"Did you love Phanes?"
"Love him? Oh yes,--I was very fond of him. When I was little he always brought me balls, dolls ninepins
from Memphis and Sais; and now that I am older he teaches me beautiful new songs."
[Jointed dolls for children. Wilkinson II. 427. Note 149. In the Leyden Museum one of these jointed toys is to
be seen, in very good preservation.]
"As a parting gift he brought me a tiny Sicilian lapdog, which I am going to call Argos, because he is so white
and swiftfooted. But in a few days we are to have another present from the good Phanes, for . . . There, now
you can see what I am; I was just going to let out a great secret. My grandmother has strictly forbidden me to
tell any one what dear little visitors we are expecting; but I feel as if I had known you a long time already, and
you have such kind eyes that I could tell you everything. You see, when I am very happy, I have no one in the
whole world to talk to about it, except old Melitta and my grandmother, and, I don't know how it is, that,
though they love me so much, they sometimes cannot understand how trifles can make me so happy."
"That is because they are old, and have forgotten what made them happy in their youth. But have you no
companions of your own age that you are fond of?"
"Not one. Of course there are many other young girls beside me in Naukratis, but my grandmother says I am
not to seek their acquaintance, and if they will not come to us I am not to go to them."
"Poor child! if you were in Persia, I could soon find you a friend. I have a sister called Atossa, who is young
and good, like you."
"Oh, what a pity that she did not come here with you!--But now you must tell me your name."
"My name is Bartja."
"Bartja! that is a strange name! Bartja-Bartja. Do you know, I like it. How was the son of Croesus called, who
saved our Phanes so generously?"
"Gyges. Darius, Zopyrus and he are my best friends. We have sworn never to part, and to give up our lives for
one another," and that is why I came to-day, so early and quite in secret, to help my friend Gyges, in case he
should need me."
"Then you rode here for nothing."
CHAPTER IX. 72
"No, by Mithras, that indeed I did not, for this ride brought me to you. But now you must tell me your name."
"I am called Sappho."
"That is a pretty name, and Gyges sings me sometimes beautiful songs by a poetess called Sappho. Are you
related to her?"
"Of course. She was the sister of my grandfather Charaxus, and is called the tenth muse or the Lesbian swan. I
suppose then, your friend Gyges speaks Greek better than you do?"
"Yes, he learnt Greek and Lydian together as a little child, and speaks them both equally well. He can speak
Persian too, perfectly; and what is more, he knows and practises all the Persian virtues."
"Which are the highest virtues then according to you Persians?"
"Truth is the first of all; courage the second, and the third is obedience; these three, joined with veneration for
the gods, have made us Persians great."
"But I thought you worshipped no gods?"
"Foolish child! who could live without a god, without a higher ruler? True, they do not dwell in houses and
pictures like the gods of the Egyptians, for the whole creation is their dwelling. The Divinity, who must be in
every place, and must see and hear everything, cannot be confined within walls."
"Where do you pray then and offer sacrifice, if you have no temples?"
"On the grandest of all altars, nature herself; our favorite altar is the summit of a mountain. There we are
nearest to our own god, Mithras, the mighty sun, and to Auramazda, the pure creative light; for there the light
lingers latest and returns earliest."
[From Herodotus (I. 131 and 132.), and from many other sources, we see clearly that at the time of the
Achaemenidae the Persians had neither temples nor images of their gods. Auramazda and Angramainjus, the
principles of good and evil, were invisible existences filling all creation with their countless train of good and
evil spirits. Eternity created fire and water. From these Ormusd (Auramazda), the good spirit, took his origin.
He was brilliant as the light, pure and good. After having, in the course of 12000 years, created heaven,
paradise and the stars, he became aware of the existence of an evil spirit, Ahriman (Angramainjus), black,
unclean, malicious and emitting an evil odor. Ormusd determined on his destruction, and a fierce strife began,
in which Ormusd was the victor, and the evil spirit lay 3000 years unconscious from the effects of terror.
During this interval Ormusd created the sky, the waters, the earth, all useful plants, trees and herbs, the ox and
the first pair of human beings in one year. Ahriman, after this, broke loose, and was overcome but not slain.
As, after death, the four elements of which all things are composed, Earth, Air, Fire and Water, become
reunited with their primitive elements; and as, at the resurrection-day, everything that has been severed
combines once more, and nothing returns into oblivion, all is reunited to its primitive elements, Ahriman
could only have been slain if his impurity could have been transmuted into purity, his darkness into light. And
so evil continued to exist, and to produce impurity and evil wherever and whenever the good spirit created the
pure and good. This strife must continue until the last day; but then Ahriman, too, will become pure and holy;
the Diws or Daewa (evil spirits) will have absorbed his evil, and themselves have ceased to exist. For the evil
spirits which dwell in every human being, and are emanations from Ahriman, will be destroyed in the
punishment inflicted on men after death. From Vuller's Ulmai Islam and the Zend-Avesta.]
"Light alone is pure and good; darkness is unclean and evil. Yes, maiden, believe me, God is nearest to us on
the mountains; they are his favorite resting-place. Have you never stood on the wooded summit of a high
CHAPTER IX. 73
mountain, and felt, amid the solemn silence of nature, the still and soft, but awful breath of Divinity hovering
around you? Have you prostrated yourself in the green forest, by a pure spring, or beneath the open sky, and
listened for the voice of God speaking from among the leaves and waters? Have you beheld the flame leaping
up to its parent the sun, and bearing with it, in the rising column of smoke, our prayers to the radiant Creator?
You listen now in wonder, but I tell you, you would kneel and worship too with me, could I but take you to
one of our mountain-altars."
"Oh! if I only could go there with you! if I might only once look down from some high mountain over all the
woods and meadows, rivers and valleys. I think, up there, where nothing could be hidden from my eyes, I
should feel like an all-seeing Divinity myself. But hark, my grandmother is calling. I must go."
"Oh, do not leave me yet!"
"Is not obedience one of the Persian virtues?"
"But my rose?"
"Here it is."
"Shall you remember me?"
"Why should I not?"
"Sweet maiden, forgive me if I ask one more favor."
"Yes, but ask it quickly, for my grandmother has just called again."
"Take my diamond star as a remembrance of this hour."
"No, I dare not."
"Oh, do, do take it. My father gave it me as a reward, the first time that I killed a bear with my own hand, and
it has been my dearest treasure till to-day, but now you shall have it, for you are dearer to me than anything
else in the world."
Saying this, he took the chain and star from his breast, and tried to hang it round Sappho's neck. She resisted,
but Bartja threw his arms round her, kissed her forehead, called her his only love, and looking down deep into
the eyes of the trembling child, placed it round her neck by gentle force.
Rhodopis called a third time. Sappho broke from the young prince's embrace, and was running away, but
turned once more at his earnest entreaty and the question, "When may I see you again?" and answered softly,
"To-morrow morning at this rose-bush."
"Which held you fast to be my friend."
Sappho sped towards the house. Rhodopis received Bartja, and communicated to him all she knew of his
friend's fate, after which the young Persian departed for Sais.
When Rhodopis visited her grandchild's bed that evening, she did not find her sleeping peacefully as usual;
her lips moved, and she sighed deeply, as if disturbed by vexing dreams.
On his way back, Bartja met Darius and Zopyrus, who had followed at once on hearing of their friend's secret
CHAPTER IX. 74
departure. They little guessed that instead of encountering an enemy, Bartja had met his first love. Croesus
reached Sais a short time before the three friends. He went at once to the king and informed him without
reserve of the events of the preceding evening. Amasis pretended much surprise at his son's conduct, assured
his friend that Gyges should be released at once, and indulged in some ironical jokes at the discomfiture of
Psamtik's attempt to revenge himself.
Croesus had no sooner quitted the king than the crown-prince was announced.
CHAPTER X.
Amasis received his son with a burst of laughter, and without noticing Psamtik's pale and troubled
countenance, shouted: "Did not I tell thee, that a simple Egyptian would find it no easy task to catch such a
Greek fox? I would have given ten cities to have been by, when thy captive proved to be the stammering
Lydian instead of the voluble Athenian."
Psamtik grew paler and paler, and trembling with rage, answered in a suppressed voice: "Is it well, my father,
thus to rejoice at an affront offered to thy son? I swear, by the eternal gods, that but for Cambyses' sake that
shameless Lydian had not seen the light of another day. But what is it to thee, that thy son becomes a
laughing-stock to these beggarly Greeks!"
"Abuse not those who have outwitted thee."
"Outwitted! my plan was so subtly laid, that . . .
"The finer the web, the sooner broken."
"That that intriguing Greek could not possibly have escaped, if, in violation of all established precedents; the
envoy of a foreign power had not taken it upon himself to rescue a man whom we had condemned."
"There thou art in error, my son. We are not speaking of the execution of a judicial sentence, but of the
success or failure of an attempt at personal revenge."
"The agents employed were, however, commissioned by the king, and therefore the smallest satisfaction that I
can demand of thee, is to solicit from Cambyses the punishment of him who has interfered in the execution of
the royal decrees. In Persia, where men bow to the king's will as to the will of a god, this crime will be seen in
all its heinousness. The punishment of Gyges is a debt which Cambyses owes us."
"But I have no intention of demanding the payment of this debt," answered Amasis. "On the contrary, I am
thankful that Phanes has escaped. Gyges has saved my soul from the guilt of shedding innocent blood, and
thine from the reproach of having revenged thyself meanly on a man, to whom thy father is indebted."
"Wilt thou then conceal the whole affair from Cambyses?"
"No, I shall mention it jestingly in a letter, as my manner is, and at the same time caution him against Phanes.
I shall tell him that he has barely escaped my vengeance, and will therefore certainly endeavor to stir up the
power of Persia against Egypt; and shall entreat my future son-in-law to close his ears to this false accuser.
Croesus and Gyges can help us by their friendship more than Phanes can injure by his hatred."
"Is this then thy final resolve? Can I expect no satisfaction?"
"None. I abide by what I have said."
CHAPTER X. 75
"Then tremble, not alone before Phanes, but before another--before one who holds thee in his power, and who
himself is in ours."
"Thou thinkest to alarm me; thou wouldst rend the bond formed only yesterday? Psamtik, Psamtik, I counsel
thee to remember, that thou standest before thy father and thy king."
"And thou, forget not that I am thy son! If thou compell'st me to forget that the gods appointed thee to be my
father--if I can hope for no help from thee, then I will resort to my own weapons."
"I am curious to learn what these may be."
"And I need not conceal them. Know then that the oculist Nebenchari is in our power."
Amasis turned pale.
"Before thou couldst possibly imagine that Cambyses would sue for the hand of thy daughter, thou sentest this
man to the distant realm of Persia, in order to rid thyself of one who shared thy knowledge of the real descent
of my, so-called, sister Nitetis. He is still there, and at a hint from the priests will disclose to Cambyses that he
has been deceived, and that thou hast ventured to send him, instead of thine own, the child of thy dethroned
predecessor Hophra. All Nebenchari's papers are in our possession, the most important being a letter in thine
own hand promising his father, who assisted at Nitetis' birth, a thousand gold rings, as an inducement to
secrecy even from the priests."
"In whose hands are these papers?" asked Amasis in a freezing tone.
"In the hands of the priesthood."
"Who speak by thy mouth?"
"Thou hast said it."
"Repeat then thy requests."
"Entreat Cambyses to punish Gyges, and grant me free powers to pursue the escaped Phanes as it shall seem
good in mine eyes."
"Is that all?"
"Bind thyself by a solemn oath to the priests, that the Greeks shall be prevented from erecting any more
temples to their false gods in Egypt, and that the building of the temple to Apollo, in Memphis, shall be
discontinued."
"I expected these demands. The priests have discovered a sharp weapon to wield against me. Well, I am
prepared to yield to the wishes of my enemies, with whom thou hast leagued thyself, but only on two
conditions. First, I insist that the letter, which I confess to have written to the father of Nebenchari in a
moment of inconsideration, be restored to me. If left in the hands of thy party, it could reduce me from a king
to the contemptible slave of priestly intrigue."
"That wish is reasonable. The letter shall be returned to thee, if....."
"Not another if! on the contrary, know that I consider thy petition for the punishment of Gyges so imprudent,
that I refuse to grant it. Now leave me and appear not again before mine eyes until I summon thee! Yesterday
CHAPTER X. 76
I gained a son, only to lose him to-day. Rise! I demand no tokens of a love and humility, which thou hast
never felt. Go to the priests when thou needest comfort and counsel, and see if they can supply a father's
place. Tell Neithotep, in whose hands thou art as wax, that he has found the best means of forcing me to grant
demands, which otherwise I should have refused. Hitherto I have been willing to make every sacrifice for the
sake of upholding Egypt's greatness; but now, when I see that, to attain their own ends, the priests can strive to
move me by the threat of treachery to their own country, I feel inclined to regard this privileged caste as a
more dangerous enemy to Egypt, than even the Persians. Beware, beware! This once, having brought danger
upon Egypt through my own fatherly weakness, I give way to the intrigues of my enemies; but, for the future,
I swear by the great goddess Neith, that men shall see and feel I am king; the entire priesthood shall be
sacrificed rather than the smallest fraction of my royal will! Silence --depart!"
The prince left, but this time a longer interval was necessary, before the king could regain even outward
cheerfulness sufficient to enable him to appear before his guests.
Psamtik went at once to the commander of the native troops, ordered him to banish the Egyptian captain who
had failed in executing his revengeful plans, to the quarries of Thebais, and to send the Ethiopians back to
their native country. He then hurried to the high-priest of Neith, to inform him how much he had been able to
extort from the king,
Neithotep shook his head doubtfully on hearing of Amasis' threats, and dismissed the prince with a few words
of exhortation, a practice he never omitted.
Psamtik returned home, his heart oppressed and his mind clouded with a sense of unsatisfied revenge, of a
new and unhappy rupture with his father, a fear of foreign derision, a feeling of his subjection to the will of
the priests, and of a gloomy fate which had hung over his head since his birth.
His once beautiful wife was dead; and, of five blooming children, only one daughter remained to him, and a
little son, whom he loved tenderly, and to whom in this sad moment he felt drawn. For the blue eyes and
laughing mouth of his child were the only objects that ever thawed this man's icy heart, and from these he now
hoped for consolation and courage on his weary road through life.
"Where is my son?" he asked of the first attendant who crossed his path.
"The king has just sent for the Prince Necho and his nurse," answered the man.
At this moment the high-steward of the prince's household approached, and with a low obeisance delivered to
Psamtik a sealed papyrus letter, with the words: "From your father, the king."
In angry haste he broke the yellow wax of the seal bearing the king's name, and read: "I have sent for thy son,
that he may not become, like his father, a blind instrument in the hands of the priesthood, forgetful of what is
due to himself and his country. His education shall be my care, for the impressions of childhood affect the
whole of a man's later life. Thou canst see him if thou wilt, but I must be acquainted with thy intention
beforehand."
[Signet rings were worn by the Egyptians at a very early period. Thus, in Genesis 41. 42., Pharaoh puts his
ring on Joseph's hand. In the Berlin Museum and all other collections of Egyptian antiquities, numbers of
these rings are to be found, many of which are more than 4000 years old.]
Psamtik concealed his indignation from the surrounding attendants with difficulty. The mere wish of a royal
father had, according to Egyptian custom, as much weight as the strictest command. After reflecting a few
moments, he called for huntsmen, dogs, bows and lances, sprang into a light chariot and commanded the
charioteer to drive him to the western marshes, where, in pursuing the wild beasts of the desert, he could
CHAPTER X. 77
forget the weight of his own cares and wreak on innocent creatures his hitherto baffled vengeance.
Gyges was released immediately after the conversation between his father and Amasis, and welcomed with
acclamations of joy by his companions. The Pharaoh seemed desirous of atoning for the imprisonment of his
friend's son by doubling his favors, for on the same day Gyges received from the king a magnificent chariot
drawn by two noble brown steeds, and was begged to take back with him to Persia a curiously-wrought set of
draughts, as a remembrance of Sais. The separate pieces were made of ebony and ivory, some being curiously
inlaid with sentences, in hieroglyphics of gold and silver.
Amasis laughed heartily with his friends at Gyges' artifice, allowed the young heroes to mix freely with his
family, and behaved towards them himself as a jovial father towards his merry sons. That the ancient Egyptian
was not quite extinguished in him could only be discerned at meal-times, when a separate table was allotted to
the Persians. The religion of his ancestors would have pronounced him defiled, had he eaten at the same table
with men of another nation.
[Herodotus II. 41. says that the Egyptians neither kissed, nor ate out of the same dish with foreigners, nay,
indeed, that they refused to touch meat, in the cutting up of which the knife of a Greek had been used. Nor
were the lesser dynasties of the Delta allowed, according to the Stela of Pianchi, to cross the threshold of the
Pharaohs because they were unclean and ate fish. In the book of Genesis, the brethren of Joseph were not
allowed to eat bread with the Egyptians.]
When Amasis, at last, three days after the release of Gyges, declared that his daughter Nitetis would be
prepared to depart for Asia in the course of two more weeks, all the Persians regretted that their stay in Egypt
was so near its close.
Croesus had enjoyed the society of the Samian poets and sculptors. Gyges had shared his father's preference
for Greek art and artists. Darius, who had formerly studied astronomy in Babylon, was one evening observing
the heavens, when, to his surprise, he was addressed by the aged Neithotep and invited to follow him on to the
temple-roof. Darius, ever eager to acquire knowledge, did not wait to be asked twice, and was to be found
there every night in earnest attention to the old priest's lessons.
On one occasion Psamtik met him thus with his master, and asked the latter what could have induced him to
initiate a Persian in the Egyptian mysteries.
"I am only teaching him," answered the high-priest, "what is as well known to every learned Chaldee in
Babylon as to ourselves, and am thereby gaining the friendship of a man, whose stars as far outshine those of
Cambyses as the sun outshines the moon. This Darius, I tell thee, will be a mighty ruler. I have even seen the
beams of his planet shining over Egypt. The truly wise man extends his gaze into the future, regards the
objects lying on either side of his road, as well as the road itself. Thou canst not know in which of the many
houses by which thou passest daily, a future benefactor may not have been reared for thee. Leave nought
unnoticed that lies in thy path, but above all direct thy gaze upward to the stars. As the faithful dog lies in wait
night after night for thieves, so have I watched these pilgrims of the heavens fifty years long--these foretellers
of the fates of men, burning in ethereal space, and announcing, not only the return of summer and winter, but
the arrival of good and bad fortune, honor and disgrace. These are the unerring guides, who have pointed out
to me in Darius a plant, that will one day wax into a mighty tree."
To Bartja, Darius' nightly studies were especially welcome; they necessitated more sleep in the morning, and
so rendered Bartja's stolen early rides to Naukratis, (on which Zopyrus, to whom he had confided his secret,
accompanied him), easier of accomplishment. During the interviews with Sappho, Zopyrus and the attendants
used all their endeavors to kill a few snipes, jackals or jerboas. They could then, on their return, maintain to
their Mentor Croesus, that they had been pursuing fieldsports, the favorite occupation of the Persian nobility.
CHAPTER X. 78
The change which the power of a first love had wrought in the innermost character of Bartja, passed unnoticed
by all but Tachot, the daughter of Amasis. From the first day on which they had spoken together she had loved
him, and her quick feelings told her at once that something had happened to estrange him from herself.
Formerly his behavior had been that of a brother, and he had sought her companionship; but now he carefully
avoided every approach to intimacy, for he had guessed her secret and felt as if even a kind look would have
been an offence against his loyalty to Sappho.
In her distress at this change Tachot confided her sorrows to Nitetis. The latter bade her take courage, and the
two girls built many a castle in the air, picturing to themselves the happiness of being always together at one
court, and married to two royal brothers. But as the days went by, the visits of the handsome prince became
more and more rare, and when he did come, his behavior to Tachot was cold and distant. Yet the poor girl
could not but confess that Bartja had grown handsomer and more manly during his stay in Egypt. An
expression of proud and yet gentle consciousness lay beaming in his large eyes, and a strange dreamy air of
rest often took the place of his former gay spirits. His cheeks had lost their brilliant color, but that added to his
beauty, while it lessened hers, who, like him, became paler from day to day.
Melitta, the old slave, had taken the lovers under her protection. She had surprised them one morning, but the
prince had given her such rich presents, and her darling had begged, flattered and coaxed so sweetly, that at
last Melitta promised to keep their secret, and later, yielding to that natural impulse which moves all old
women to favor lovers, had even given them every assistance in her power. She already saw her "sweet child"
mistress of a hemisphere, often addressed her as "my Princess" and "my Queen" when none were by to hear,
and in many a weak moment imagined a brilliant future for herself in some high office at the Persian court.
ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:
A kind word hath far more power than an angry one Abuse not those who have outwitted thee Cannot
understand how trifles can make me so happy Confess I would rather provoke a lioness than a woman
Curiosity is a woman's vice I cannot . . . Say rather: I will not In this immense temple man seemed a dwarf in
his own eyes Know how to honor beauty; and prove it by taking many wives Mosquito-tower with which
nearly every house was provided Natural impulse which moves all old women to favor lovers Sent for a
second interpreter Sing their libels on women (Greek Philosophers) Those are not my real friends who tell me
I am beautiful Young Greek girls pass their sad childhood in close rooms
AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS.
By Georg Ebers
Volume 4.
CHAPTER XI.
Three days before the time fixed for the departure of Nitetis, Rhodopis had invited a large number of guests to
her house at Naukratis, amongst whom Croesus and Gyges were included.
The two lovers had agreed to meet in the garden, protected by the darkness and the old slave, while the guests
were occupied at the banquet. Melitta, therefore, having convinced herself that the guests were thoroughly
absorbed in conversation, opened the garden-gate, admitted the prince, brought Sappho to him, and then
retired, promising to warn them of any intruder by clapping her hands.
"I shall only have you near me three days longer," whispered Sappho. "Do you know, sometimes it seems to
me as if I had only seen you yesterday for the first time; but generally I feel as if you had belonged to me for a
CHAPTER XI. 79
whole eternity, and I had loved you all my life."
"To me too it seems as if you had always been mine, for I cannot imagine how I could ever have existed
without you. If only the parting were over and we were together again!"
"Oh, believe me, that will pass more quickly than you fancy. Of course it will seem long to wait--very long;
but when it is over, and we are together again, I think it will seem as if we had never been parted. So it has
been with me every day. How I have longed for the morning to come and bring you with it! but when it came
and you were sitting by my side, I felt as if I had had you all the time and your hand had never left my head."
"And yet a strange feeling of fear comes over me, when I think of our parting hour."
"I do not fear it so very much. I know my heart will bleed when you say farewell, but I am sure you will come
back and will not have forgotten me. Melitta wanted to enquire of the Oracle whether you would remain
faithful; and to question an old woman who has just come from Phrygia and can conjure by night from drawn
cords, with incense, styrax, moon-shaped cakes, and wild-briar leaves; but I would have none of this, for my
heart knows better than the Pythia, the cords, or the smoke of sacrifice, that you will be true to me, and love
me always."
"And your heart speaks the truth."
"But I have sometimes been afraid; and have blown into a poppy-leaf, and struck it, as the young girls here do.
If it broke with a loud crack I was very happy, and cried, 'Ah! he will not forget!' but if the leaf tore without a
sound I felt sad. I dare say I did this a hundred times, but generally the leaf gave the wished-for sound, and I
had much oftener reason to be joyful than sad."
"May it be ever thus!"
"It must be! but dearest, do not speak so loudly; I see Knakias going down to the Nile for water and he will
hear us."
"Well, I will speak low. There, I will stroke back your silky hair and whisper in your ear 'I love you.' Could
you understand?"
"My grandmother says that it is easy to understand what we like to hear; but if you had just whispered, 'I hate
you,' your eyes would have told me with a thousand glad voices that you loved me. Silent eyes are much more
eloquent than all the tongues in the world."
"If I could only speak the beautiful Greek language as you do, I would.."
"Oh, I am so glad you cannot, for if you could tell me all you feel, I think you would not look into my eyes so
lovingly. Words are nothing. Listen to the nightingale yonder! She never had the gift of speech and yet I think
I can understand her."
"Will you confide her secret to me? I should like to know what Gulgul, as we Persians call the nightingale,
has to talk about to her mate in the rose-bush. May you betray her secret?"
"I will whisper it softly. Philomel sings to her mate 'I love thee,' and he answers, (don't you hear him?), 'Itys,
ito, itys.'"
"And what does that mean, 'Ito, ito?'"
CHAPTER XI. 80
"I accept it."
"And Itys?"
"Oh, that must be explained, to be rightly understood. Itys is a circle; and a circle, I was always taught, is the
symbol of eternity, having neither beginning nor end; so the nightingale sings, 'I accept it for eternity.'"
"And if I say to you, 'I love thee?'"
"Then I shall answer gladly, like the sweet nightingale, 'I accept it for to-day, to-morrow, for all eternity!'"
"What a wonderful night it is! everything so still and silent; I do not even hear the nightingale now; she is
sitting in the acacia-tree among the bunches of sweet blossoms. I can see the tops of the palm-trees in the Nile,
and the moon's reflection between them, glistening like a white swan."
"Yes, her rays are over every living thing like silver fetters, and the whole world lies motionless beneath them
like a captive woman. Happy as I feel now, yet I could not even laugh, and still less speak in a loud voice."
"Then whisper, or sing!"
"Yes, that is the best. Give me a lyre. Thank you. Now I will lean my head on your breast, and sing you a
little, quiet, peaceful song. It was written by Alkman, the Lydian, who lived in Sparta, in praise of night and
her stillness. You must listen though, for this low, sweet slumber- song must only leave the lips like a gentle
wind. Do not kiss me any more, please, till I have finished; then I will ask you to thank me with a kiss:
"Now o'er the drowsy earth still night prevails, Calm sleep the mountain tops and shady vales, The rugged
cliffs and hollow glens;
The wild beasts slumber in their dens; The cattle on the bill. Deep in the sea The countless finny race and
monster brood Tranquil repose. Even the busy bee Forgets her daily toil. The silent wood No more with noisy
hum of insect rings; And all the feathered tribe, by gentle sleep subdued, Roost in the glade and hang their
drooping wings." --Translation by Colonel Mure.
"Now, dearest, where is my kiss?"
"I had forgotten it in listening, just as before I forgot to listen in kissing."
"You are too bad. But tell me, is not my song lovely?"
"Yes, beautiful, like everything else you sing."
"And the Greek poets write?"
"Yes, there you are right too, I admit."
"Are there no poets in Persia?"
"How can you ask such a question? How could a nation, who despised song, pretend to any nobility of
feeling?"
"But you have some very bad customs."
CHAPTER XI. 81
"Well?"
"You take so many wives."
"My Sappho . . ."
"Do not misunderstand me. I love you so much, that I have no other wish than to see you happy and be
allowed to be always with you. If, by taking me for your only wife, you would outrage the laws of your
country, if you would thereby expose yourself to contempt, or even blame, (for who could dare to despise my
Bartja!) then take other wives; but let me have you, for myself alone, at least two, or perhaps even three years.
Will you promise this, Bartja?"
"I will."
"And then, when my time has passed, and you must yield to the customs of your country (for it will not be
love that leads you to bring home a second wife), then let me be the first among your slaves. Oh! I have
pictured that so delightfully to myself. When you go to war I shall set the tiara on your head, gird on the
sword, and place the lance in your hand; and when you return a conqueror, I shall be the first to crown you
with the wreath of victory. When you ride out to the chase, mine will be the duty of buckling on your spurs,
and when you go to the banquet, of adorning and anointing you, winding the garlands of poplar and roses and
twining them around your forehead and shoulders. If wounded, I will be your nurse; will never stir from your
side if you are ill, and when I see you happy will retire, and feast my eyes from afar on your glory and
happiness. Then perchance you will call me to your side, and your kiss will say, 'I am content with my
Sappho, I love her still.'"
"O Sappho, wert thou only my wife now!--to-day! The man who possesses such a treasure as I have in thee,
will guard it carefully, but never care to seek for others which, by its side, can only show their miserable
poverty. He who has once loved thee, can never love another: I know it is the custom in my country to have
many wives, but this is only allowed; there is no law to enjoin it. My father had, it is true, a hundred female
slaves, but only one real, true wife, our mother Kassandane."
"And I will be your Kassandane."
"No, my Sappho, for what you will be to me, no woman ever yet was to her husband."
"When shall you come to fetch me?"
"As soon as I can, and am permitted to do so."
"Then I ought to be able to wait patiently."
"And shall I ever hear from you?"
"Oh, I shall write long, long letters, and charge every wind with loving messages for you."
"Yes, do so, my darling; and as to the letters, give them to the messenger who will bring Nitetis tidings from
Egypt from time to time."
"Where shall I find him?"
"I will see that a man is stationed at Naukratis, to take charge of everything you send to him. All this I will
settle with Melitta."
CHAPTER XI. 82
"Yes, we can trust her, she is prudent and faithful; but I have another friend, who is dearer to me than any one
else excepting you, and who loves me too better than any one else does, but you--"
"You mean your grandmother Rhodopis."
"Yes, my faithful guardian and teacher."
"Ah, she is a noble woman. Croesus considers her the most excellent among women, and he has studied
mankind as the physicians do plants and herbs. He knows that rank poison lies hidden in some, in others
healing cordials, and often says that Rhodopis is like a rose which, while fading away herself, and dropping
leaf after leaf, continues to shed perfume and quickening balsam for the sick and weak, and awaits in patience
the wind which at last shall waft her from us."
"The gods grant that she may be with us for a long time yet! Dearest, will you grant me one great favor?"
"It is granted before I hear it."
"When you take me home, do not leave Rhodopis here. She must come with us. She is so kind and loves me
so fervently, that what makes me happy will make her so too, and whatever is dear to me, will seem to her
worthy of being loved."
"She shall be the first among our guests."
"Now I am quite happy and satisfied, for I am necessary to my grandmother; she could not live without her
child. I laugh her cares and sorrows away, and when she is singing to me, or teaching me how to guide the
style, or strike the lute, a clearer light beams from her brow, the furrows ploughed by grief disappear, her
gentle eyes laugh, and she seems to forget the evil past in the happy present."
"Before we part, I will ask her whether she will follow us home."
"Oh, how glad that makes me! and do you know, the first days of our absence from each other do not seem so
very dreadful to me. Now you are to be my husband, I may surely tell you everything that pains or pleases me,
even when I dare not tell any one else, and so you must know, that, when you leave, we expect two little
visitors; they are the children of the kind Phanes, whom your friend Gyges saved so nobly. I mean to be like a
mother to the little creatures, and when they have been good I shall sing them a story of a prince, a brave hero,
who took a simple maiden to be his wife; and when I describe the prince I shall have you in my mind, and
though my little listeners will not guess it, I shall be describing you from head to foot. My prince shall be tall
like you, shall have your golden curls and blue eyes, and your rich, royal dress shall adorn his noble figure.
Your generous heart, your love of truth, and your beautiful reverence for the gods, your courage and heroism,
in short, every thing that I love and honor in you, I shall give to the hero of my tale. How the children will
listen! and when they cry, 'Oh, how we love the prince, how good and beautiful he must be! if we could only
see him? then I shall press them close to my heart and kiss them as I kiss you now, and so they will have
gained their wish, for as you are enthroned in my heart, you must be living within me and therefore near to
them, and when they embrace me they will embrace you too."
"And I shall go to my little sister Atossa and tell her all I have seen on my journey, and when I speak of the
Greeks, their grace, their glorious works of art, and their beautiful women, I shall describe the golden
Aphrodite in your lovely likeness. I shall tell her of your virtue, your beauty and modesty, of your singing,
which is so sweet that even the nightingale is silent in order to listen to it, of your love and tenderness. But all
this I shall tell her belongs to the divine Cypris, and when she cries, 'O Aphrodite, could I but see thee!' I too
shall kiss my sister."
CHAPTER XI. 83
"Hark, what was that? Melitta surely clapped her hands. Farewell, we must not stay! but we shall soon see
each other again."
"One more kiss!"
"Farewell!"
Melitta had fallen asleep at her post, overcome by age and weariness. Her dreams were suddenly disturbed by
a loud noise, and she clapped her hands directly to warn the lovers and call Sappho, as she perceived by the
stars that the dawn was not far off.
As the two approached the house, they discovered that the noise which had awakened the old slave, proceeded
from the guests, who were preparing for departure.
Urging her to make the greatest haste, Melitta pushed the frightened girl into the house, took her at once to her
sleeping-room, and was beginning to undress her when Rhodopis entered.
"You are still up, Sappho?" she asked.
"What is this, my child?"
Melitta trembled and had a falsehood ready on her lips, but Sappho, throwing herself into her grandmother's
arms, embraced her tenderly and told the whole story of her love.
Rhodopis turned pale, ordered Melitta to leave the chamber, and, placing herself in front of her grandchild,
laid both hands on her shoulders and said earnestly, "Look into my eyes, Sappho. Canst thou look at me as
happily and as innocently, as thou couldst before this Persian came to us?"
The girl raised her eyes at once with a joyful smile; then Rhodopis clasped her to her bosom, kissed her and
continued: "Since thou wert a little child my constant effort has been to train thee to a noble maidenhood and
guard thee from the approach of love. I had intended, in accordance with the customs of our country, to
choose a fitting husband for thee shortly myself, to whose care I should have committed thee; but the gods
willed differently.
[The Spartans married for love, but the Athenians were accustomed to negotiate their marriages with the
parents of the bride alone.]
Eros mocks all human efforts to resist or confine him; warm AEolian blood runs in thy veins and demands
love; the passionate heart of thy Lesbian forefathers beats in thy breast.
[Charaxus, the grandfather of our heroine, and brother of the poetess Sappho, was, as a Lesbian, an AEolian
Greek.]
What has happened cannot now be undone. Treasure these happy hours of a first, pure love; hold them fast in
the chambers of memory, for to every human being there must come, sooner or later, a present so sad and
desolate, that the beautiful past is all he has to live upon. Remember this handsome prince in silence, bid him
farewell when he departs to his native country, but beware of hoping to see him again. The Persians are fickle
and inconstant, lovers of everything new and foreign. The prince has been fascinated by thy sweetness and
grace. He loves thee ardently now, but remember, he is young and handsome, courted by every one, and a
Persian. Give him up that he may not abandon thee!"
"But how can I, grandmother? I have sworn to be faithful to him for ever."
CHAPTER XI. 84
"Oh, children! Ye play with eternity as if it were but a passing moment! I could blame thee for thus plighting
thy troth, but I rejoice that thou regardest the oath as binding. I detest the blasphemous proverb: 'Zeus pays no
heed to lovers' oaths.' Why should an oath touching the best and holiest feelings of humanity be regarded by
the Deity, as inferior in importance to asseverations respecting the trifling questions of mine and thine? Keep
thy promise then,--hold fast thy love, but prepare to renounce thy lover."
"Never, grandmother! could I ever have loved Bartja, if I had not trusted him? Just because he is a Persian and
holds truth to be the highest virtue, I may venture to hope that he will remember his oath, and,
notwithstanding those evil customs of the Asiatics, will take and keep me as his only wife."
"But if he should forget, thy youth will be passed in mourning, and with an embittered heart . . ."
"O, dear kind grandmother, pray do not speak of such dreadful things. If you knew him as well as I do, you
would rejoice with me, and would tell me I was right to believe that the Nile may dry up and the Pyramids
crumble into ruins, before my Bartja can ever deceive me!"
The girl spoke these words with such a joyful, perfect confidence, and her eyes, though filled with tears, were
so brilliant with happiness and warmth of feeling, that Rhodopis' face grew cheerful too.
Sappho threw her arms again round her grandmother, told her every word that Bartja had said to her, and
ended the long account by exclaiming: "Oh, grandmother, I am so happy, so very happy, and if you will come
with us to Persia, I shall have nothing more to wish from the Immortals."
"That will not last long," said Rhodopis. "The gods cast envious glances at the happiness of mortals; they
measure our portion of evil with lavish hands, and give us but a scanty allowance of good. But now go to bed,
my child, and let us pray together that all may end happily. I met thee this morning as a child, I part from thee
to-night a woman; and, when thou art a wife, may thy kiss be as joyful as the one thou givest me now.
To-morrow I will talk the matter over with Croesus. He must decide whether I dare allow thee to await the
return of the Persian prince, or whether I must entreat thee to forget him and become the domestic wife of a
Greek husband. Sleep well, my darling, thy grandmother will wake and watch for thee."
Sappho's happy fancies soon cradled her to sleep; but Rhodopis remained awake watching the day dawn, and
the sun rise, her mind occupied with thoughts which brought smiles and frowns across her countenance in
rapid succession.
The next morning she sent to Croesus, begging him to grant her an hour's interview, acquainted him with
every particular she had heard from Sappho, and concluded her tale with these words: "I know not what
demands may be made on the consort of a Persian king, but I can truly say that I believe Sappho to be worthy
of the first monarch of the world. Her father was free and of noble birth, and I have heard that, by Persian law,
the descent of a child is determined by the rank of the father only. In Egypt, too, the descendants of a female
slave enjoy the same rights as those of a princess, if they owe their existence to the same father."
"I have listened to you in silence," answered Croesus, "and must confess, that, like yourself, I do not know in
this moment whether to be glad or sorry for this attachment. Cambyses and Kassandane (the king's and
Bartja's mother) wished to see the prince married before we left Persia, for the king has no children, and
should he remain childless, the only hope for the family of Cyrus rests on Bartja, as the great founder of the
Persian empire left but two sons,--Cambyses, and him who is now the suitor of your granddaughter. The latter
is the hope and pride of the entire Persian nation, high and low; the darling of the people; generous, and noble,
handsome, virtuous, and worthy of their love. It is indeed expected that the princes shall marry in their own
family, the Achaemenidae; but the Persians have an unbounded predilection for everything foreign. Enchanted
with the beauty of your granddaughter, and rendered indulgent by their partiality for Bartja, they would easily
forgive this breach of an ancient custom. Indeed, if the king gives his approval, no objection on the part of his
CHAPTER XI. 85
subjects can be entertained. The history of Iran too offers a sufficient number of examples, in which even
slaves became the mothers of kings. The queen mother, whose position, in the eyes of the people, is nearly as
high as that of the monarch himself, will do nothing to thwart the happiness of her youngest and favorite son.
When she sees that he will not give up Sappho,--that his smiling face, in which she adores the image of her
great husband Cyrus, becomes clouded, I verily believe she would be ready to sanction his taking even a
Scythian woman to wife, if it could restore him to cheerfulness. Neither will Cambyses himself refuse his
consent if his mother press the point at a right moment."
"In that case every difficulty is set aside," cried Rhodopis joyfully.
"It is not the marriage itself, but the time that must follow, which causes me uneasiness," answered Croesus.
"Do you think then that Bartja . . . ?"
"From him I fear nothing. He has a pure heart, and has been so long proof against love, that now he has once
yielded, he will love long and ardently."
"What then do you fear?"
"You must remember that, though the charming wife of their favorite will be warmly received by all his
friends of his own sex, there are thousands of idle women in the harems of the Persian nobles, who will
endeavor, by every artifice and intrigue in their power, to injure the newly-risen star; and whose greatest joy it
will be to ruin such an inexperienced child and make her unhappy."
"You have a very bad opinion of the Persian women."
"They are but women, and will naturally envy her, who has gained the husband they all desired either for
themselves or for their daughters. In their monotonous life, devoid of occupation, envy easily becomes hatred,
and the gratification of these evil passions is the only compensation which the poor creatures can obtain for
the total absence of love and loss of freedom. I repeat, the more beautiful Sappho is, the more malicious they
will feel towards her, and, even if Bartja should love her so fervently as not to take a second wife for two or
three years, she will still have such heavy hours to encounter, that I really do not know whether I dare
congratulate you on her apparently brilliant future."
"That is quite my own feeling. A simple Greek would be more welcome to me than this son of a mighty
monarch."
In this moment Knakias brought Bartja into the room. He went to Rhodopis at once, besought her not to refuse
him the hand of her granddaughter, spoke of his ardent love, and assured her that his happiness would be
doubled, if she would consent to accompany them to Persia. Then turning to Croesus, he seized his hand and
entreated forgiveness for having so long concealed his great happiness from one who had been like a father to
him, at the same time begging him to second his suit with Rhodopis.
The old man listened to the youth's passionate language with a smile, and said: "Ah, Bartja, how often have I
warned thee against love! It is a scorching fire."
"But its flame is bright and beautiful."
"It causes pain."
"But such pain is sweet."
CHAPTER XI. 86
"It leads the mind astray."
"But it strengthens the heart."
"Oh, this love!" cried Rhodopis. "Inspired by Eros, the boy speaks as if he had been all his life studying under
an Attic orator!"
"And yet," answered Croesus, "these lovers are the most unteachable of pupils. Convince them as clearly as
you will, that their passion is only another word for poison, fire, folly, death, they still cry, 'Tis sweet,' and
will not be hindered in their course."
As he was speaking Sappho came in. A white festal robe, with wide sleeves, and borders of purple
embroidery, fell in graceful folds round her delicate figure, and was confined at the waist by a golden girdle.
Her hair was adorned with fresh roses, and on her bosom lay her lover's first gift, the flashing diamond star.
She came up modestly and gracefully, and made a low obeisance to the aged Croesus. His eyes rested long on
the maidenly and lovely countenance, and the longer he gazed the kindlier became his gaze. For a moment he
seemed to grow young again in the visions conjured up by memory, and involuntarily he went up to the young
girl, kissed her affectionately on the forehead, and, taking her by the hand, led her to Bartja with the words:
"Take her, thy wife she must be, if the entire race of the Achaemenidae were to conspire against us!"
"Have I no voice in the matter?" said Rhodopis, smiling through her tears.
On hearing these words, Bartja and Sappho each took one of her hands, and gazed entreatingly into her face.
She rose to her full stature, and like a prophetess exclaimed: "Eros, who brought you to each other, Zeus and
Apollo defend and protect you. I see you now like two fair roses on one stem, loving and happy in the spring
of life. What summer, autumn and winter may have in store for you, lies hidden with the gods. May the shades
of thy departed parents, Sappho, smile approvingly when these tidings of their child shall reach them in the
nether world."
.................................
Three days later a densely packed crowd was once more surging round the Sais landing-place. This time they
had assembled to bid a last farewell to their king's daughter, and in this hour the people gave clear tokens that,
in spite of all the efforts of the priestly caste, their hearts remained loyal to their monarch and his house. For
when Amasis and Ladice embraced Nitetis for the last time with tears--when Tachot, in presence of all the
inhabitants of Sais, following her sister down the broad flight of steps that led to the river, threw her arms
round her neck once more and burst into sobs--when at last the wind filled the sails of the royal boat and bore
the princess, destined to be the great king's bride, from their sight, few eyes among that vast crowd remained
dry.
The priests alone looked on at this sad scene with unmoved gravity and coldness; but when the south wind at
last bore away the strangers who had robbed them of their princess, many a curse and execration followed
from the Egyptians on the shore; Tachot alone stood weeping there and waving her veil to them. For whom
were these tears? for the play-fellow of her youth, or for the handsome, beloved prince?
Amasis embraced his wife and daughter in the eyes of all his people; and held up his little grandson, Prince
Necho, to their gaze, the sight eliciting cries of joy on all sides. But Psamtik, the child's own father, stood by
the while, tearless and motionless. The king appeared not to observe him, until Neithotep approached, and
leading him to his father, joined their hands and called down the blessing of the gods upon the royal house.
At this the Egyptians fell on their knees with uplifted hands. Amasis clasped his son to his heart, and when the
CHAPTER XI. 87
high-priest had concluded his prayer, the following colloquy between the latter and Amasis took place in low
tones:
"Let peace be between us for our own and Egypt's sake!"
"Hast thou received Nebenchari's letter?"
"A Samian pirate-vessel is in pursuit of Phanes' trireme."
"Behold the child of thy predecessor Hophra, the rightful heiress of the Egyptian throne, departing unhindered
to a distant land!"
"The works of the Greek temple now building in Memphis shall be discontinued."
"May Isis grant us peace, and may prosperity and happiness increase in our land!"
............................
The Greek colonists in Naukratis had prepared a feast to celebrate the departure of their protector's daughter.
Numerous animals had been slaughtered in sacrifice on the altars of the Greek divinities, and the Nile-boats
were greeted with a loud cry of "Ailinos" on their arrival in the harbor.
A bridal wreath, composed of a hoop of gold wound round with scented violets, was presented to Nitetis by a
troop of young girls in holiday dresses, the act of presentation being performed by Sappho, as the most
beautiful among the maidens of Naukratis.
On accepting the gift Nitetis kissed her forehead in token of gratitude. The triremes were already waiting; she
went on board, the rowers took their oars and began the Keleusma.
[The measure of the Keleusma was generally given by a flute-player, the Trieraules. AEschylus, Persians 403.
Laert. Diog. IV. 22. In the Frogs of Aristophanes the inhabitants of the marshes are made to sing the
Keleusma, v. 205. The melody, to the measure of which the Greek boatmen usually timed their strokes.]
Ailinos rang across the water from a thousand voices. Bartja stood on the deck, and waved a last loving
farewell to his betrothed; while Sappho prayed in silence to Aphrodite Euploia, the protectress of those who
go down to the sea in ships. A tear rolled down her cheek, but around her lips played a smile of love and hope,
though her old slave Melitta, who accompanied her to carry her parasol, was weeping as if her heart would
break. On seeing, however, a few leaves fall from her darling's wreath, she forgot her tears for a moment and
whispered softly: "Yes, dear heart, it is easy to see that you are in love; when the leaves fall from a maiden's
wreath, 'tis a sure sign that her heart has been touched by Eros.
CHAPTER XII.
Seven weeks after Nitetis had quitted her native country, a long train of equipages and horsemen was to be
seen on the king's highway from the west to Babylon, moving steadily towards that gigantic city, whose
towers might already be descried in the far distance.
[The great road called the "king's road," of which we shall have more to say, was made by Cyrus and carefully
kept up by Darius.]
CHAPTER XII. 88
The principal object in this caravan was a richly-gilded, four-wheeled carriage, closed in at the sides by
curtains, and above by a roof supported on wooden pillars. In this vehicle, called the Harmamaxa, resting on
rich cushions of gold brocade, sat our Egyptian Princess.
[Harmamaxa--An Asiatic travelling carriage. The first mention of these is in Xenophon's Anabasis, where we
find a queen travelling in such a vehicle. They were later adopted by the Romans and used for the same
object.]
On either side rode her escort, viz.: the Persian princes and nobles whom we have already learnt to know
during their visit to Egypt, Croesus and his son.
Behind these, a long train, consisting of fifty vehicles of different kinds and six hundred beasts of burden,
stretched away into the distance, and the royal carriage was preceded by a troop of splendidly-mounted
Persian cavalry.
The high-road followed the course of the Euphrates, passing through luxuriant fields of wheat, barley and
sesame yielding fruit two, and sometimes even three, hundred-fold. Slender date-palms covered with golden
fruit were scattered in every direction over the fields, which were thoroughly irrigated by means of canals and
ditches.
It was winter, but the sun shone warm and bright from a cloudless sky. The mighty river swarmed with craft
of all sizes, either transporting the products of Upper Armenia to the plains of Mesopotamia, or the wares of
Greece and Asia Minor from Thapsakus to Babylon.
[Thapsakus--An important commercial town on the Euphrates, and the point of observation from which
Eratosthenes took his measurements of the earth.]
Pumps and water-wheels poured refreshing streams over the thirsty land, and pretty villages ornamented the
shores of the river. Indeed every object gave evidence that our caravan was approaching the metropolis of a
carefully governed and civilized state.
Nitetis and her retinue now halted at a long brick house, roofed with asphalte, and surrounded by a grove of
plane-trees.
[Asphalte--Nearly all authorities, ancient as well as modern, report that bitumen, which is still plentifully
found in the neighborhood of Babylon, was used by the Babylonians as mortar. See, besides the accounts of
ancient writers, W. Vaux, 'Nineveh and Persepolis'. Burnt bitumen was used by Assyrians for cement in
building.]
Here Croesus was lifted from his horse, and approaching the carriage, exclaimed: "Here we are at length at the
last station! That high tower which you see on the horizon is the celebrated temple of Bel, next to the
Pyramids, one of the most gigantic works ever constructed by human hands. Before sunset we shall have
reached the brazen gates of Babylon. And now I would ask you to alight, and let me send your maidens into
the house; for here you must put on Persian apparel, to appear well-pleasing in the eyes of Cambyses. In a few
hours you will stand before your future husband. But you are pale! Permit your maidens to adorn your cheeks
with a color that shall look like the excitement of joy. A first impression is often a final one, and this is
especially true with regard to Cambyses. If, which I doubt not, you are pleasing in his eyes at first, then you
have won his love for ever; but if you should displease him to-day he will never look kindly on you again, for
he is rough and harsh. But take courage, my daughter, and above all, do not forget the advice I have given
you." Nitetis dried her tears as she answered: "How can I ever thank you, O Croesus, my second father, my
protector and adviser, for all your goodness? Oh, forsake me not in the days to come! and if the path of my
life should lead through grief and care, be near to help and guide me as you did on the mountain-passes of this
CHAPTER XII. 89
long and dangerous journey. A thousand times I thank thee, O my father!"
And, as she said these words, the young girl threw her arms around the old man's neck and kissed him
tenderly.
On entering the court-yard, a tall stout man, followed by a train of Asiatic serving-maidens, came forward to
meet them. This was Boges, the chief of the eunuchs, an important official at the Persian court. His beardless
face wore a smile of fulsome sweetness; in his ears hung costly jewelled pendents; his neck, arms, legs and his
effeminately long garments glittered all over with gold chains and rings, and his crisp, stiff curls, bound round
by a purple fillet, streamed with powerful and penetrating perfumes.
Making a low and reverential obeisance before Nitetis, and holding, the while, his fat hands overloaded with
rings before his mouth, he thus addressed her: "Cambyses, lord of the world, hath sent me to thee, O Queen,
that I may refresh thy heart with the dew of his salutations. He sendeth thee likewise by me, even by me the
lowest of his servants, Persian raiment, that thou, as befitteth the consort of the mightiest of all rulers, mayest
approach the gates of the Achaemenidae in Median garments. These women whom thou seest are thy
handmaidens, and only await thy bidding to transform thee from an Egyptian jewel into a Persian pearl."
The master of the caravansary then appeared, bearing, in token of welcome, a basket of fruits arranged with
great taste.
Nitetis returned her thanks to both these men in kind and friendly words; then entering the house laid aside the
dress and ornaments of her native land, weeping as she did so, allowed the strangers to unloose the plait of
hair which hung down at the left side of her head, and was the distinctive mark of an Egyptian princess, and to
array her in Median garments.
[In almost all the Egyptian pictures, the daughters and sons of the Pharaohs are represented with these locks of
hair, plaited and reaching from the forehead to the neck. Rosellini, Mon. stor. II. 123. Lepsius, Denkmaler.
The daughter of Rameses II. is drawn thus, and we have examples of the same in many other pictures.]
In the meantime, a repast had been commanded by the princes who accompanied her. Eager and agile
attendants rushed to the baggage- waggons, fetching thence, in a few moments, seats, tables, and golden
utensils of all kinds. The cooks vied with them and with each other, and as if by magic, in a short space of
time a richly-adorned banquet for the hungry guests appeared, at which even the flowers were not wanting.
During the entire journey our travellers had lived in a similar luxury, as their beasts of burden carried every
imaginable convenience, from tents of water-proof materials inwrought with gold, down to silver foot- stools;
and in the vehicles which composed their train were not only bakers, cooks, cup-bearers and carvers, but
perfumers, hair-dressers and weavers of garlands. Beside these conveniences, a well-fitted up caravansary, or
inn, was to be found about every eighteen miles along the whole route, where disabled horses could be
replaced, the plantations around which afforded a refreshing shelter from the noonday heat, or their hearths a
refuge from the snow and cold on the mountain-passes.
The kingdom of Persia was indebted for these inns (similar to the post- stations of modern days) to Cyrus,
who had endeavored to connect the widely-distant provinces of his immense dominions by a system of wellkept
roads, and a regular postal service. At each of these stations the horseman carrying the letter-bag was
relieved by a fresh man on a fresh steed, to whom the letters were transferred, and who, in his turn, darted off
like the wind, to be again replaced at a similar distance by another rider. These couriers, called Angari, were
considered the swiftest horsemen in the world.
[Herodotus V. 14. 49-52. Persian milestones are still to be found among the ruins of the old king's road, which
led from Nineveh to Ecbatana. The Kurds call them keli-Shin (blue pillars).]
CHAPTER XII. 90
Just as the banqueters, amongst whom Boges had taken his seat, were rising from table, the door opened, and
a vision appeared, which drew prolonged exclamation of surprise from all the Persians present. Nitetis, clad in
the glorious apparel of a Median princess, proud in the consciousness of her triumphant beauty, and yet
blushing like a young girl at the wondering admiration of her friends, stood before them.
The attendants involuntarily fell on their faces before her, according to the custom of the Asiatics, and the
noble Achaemenidae bowed low and reverentially; for it seemed as if Nitetis has laid aside all her former
bashfulness and timidity with her simple Egyptian dress, and with the splendid silken garments of a Persian
princess, flashing as they were with gold and jewels, had clothed herself in the majesty of a queen.
The deep reverence paid by all present seemed agreeable to her, and thanking her admiring friends by a
gracious wave of the hand, she turned to the chief of the eunuchs and said in a kind tone but mingled with a
touch of pride; "Thou hast performed thy mission well; I am content with the raiment and the slaves that thou
hast provided and shall commend thy circumspection to the king, my husband. Receive this gold chain in the
meanwhile, as a token of my gratitude."
The eunuch kissed the hem of her garment, and accepted the gift in silence. This man, hitherto omnipotent in
his office, had never before encountered such pride in any of the women committed to his charge. Up to the
present time all Cambyses' wives had been Asiatics, and, well aware of the unlimited power of the chief of the
eunuchs, had used every means within their reach to secure his favor by flattery and submission.
Boges now made a second obeisance before Nitetis, of which, however, she took no notice, and turning to
Croesus said: "Neither words nor gifts could ever suffice to express my gratitude to you, kindest of friends,
for, if my future life at the court of Persia prove, I will not venture to say a happy, but even a peaceful one, it
is to you alone that I shall owe it. Still, take this ring. It has never left my finger since I quitted Egypt, and it
has a significance far beyond its outward worth. Pythagoras, the noblest of the Greeks, gave it to my mother,
when he was tarrying in Egypt to learn the wisdom of our priests, and it was her parting gift to me. The
number seven is engraved upon the simple stone. This indivisible number represents perfect health, both to
soul and body for health is likewise one and indivisible.
[Seven, the "motherless" number, which has no factor below ten.]
The sickness of one member is the sickness of all; one evil thought, allowed to take up its abode within our
heart, destroys the entire harmony of the soul. When you see this seven therefore, let it recall my heart's wish
that you may ever enjoy undisturbed bodily health, and long retain that loving gentleness which has made you
the most virtuous, and therefore the healthiest of men. No thanks, my father, for even if I could restore to
Croesus all the treasures that he once possessed, I should still retrain his debtor. Gyges, to you I give this
Lydian lyre; let its tones recall the giver to your memory. For you, Zopyrus, I have a golden chain; I have
witnessed that you are the most faithful of friends; and we Egyptians are accustomed to place cords and bands
in the hands of our lovely Hathor, the goddess of love and friendship, as symbols of her captivating and
enchaining attributes. As Darius has studied the wisdom of Egypt and the signs of the starry heavens, I beg
him to take this circlet of gold, on which a skilful hand has traced the signs of the Zodiac.
[Diodorus (I. 49.) tells, that in the tomb of Osymandyas (palace of Rameses II. at Thebes) there lay a circle of
gold, one ell thick and 365 ells in circumference, containing a complete astronomical calendar. The circle of
the zodiac from Dendera, which is now in Paris,--an astronomical ceiling painting, which was believed at the
time of its discovery to be of great age, is not nearly so ancient as was supposed, dating only from the end of
the Ptolemaic dynasty. Letronne was the first to estimate it correctly. See Lepsius, Chron. p.63. and Lauth, 'les
zodiaques de Dendera'. Munich 1865.]
And lastly, to my dear brother-in-law Bartja I commit the most precious jewel in my possession--this amulet
of blue stone. My sister Tachot hung it round my neck as I kissed her on the last night before we parted; she
CHAPTER XII. 91
told me it could bring to its wearer the sweet bliss of love. And then, Bartja, she wept! I do not know of whom
she was thinking in that moment, but I hope I am acting according to her wishes in giving you her precious
jewel. Take it as a gift from Tachot, and sometimes call to mind our games in the Sais gardens."
Thus far she had been speaking Greek, but now, addressing the attendants who remained standing in an
attitude of deep reverence, she began in broken Persian: "Accept my thanks also. In Babylon you shall receive
a thousand gold staters." Then turning to Boges, she added: "Let this sum be distributed among the attendants
at latest by the day after to-morrow. Take me to my carriage, Croesus."
The old king hastened to do her bidding, and as he was leading her thither she pressed his arm and whispered
gently, "Are you pleased with me, my father?"
"I tell you, girl," the old man answered, "that no one but the king's mother can ever be your equal at this court,
for a true and queenly pride reigns on your brow, and you have the power of using small means to effect great
ends. Believe me, the smallest gift, chosen and bestowed as you can choose and bestow, gives more pleasure
to a noble mind than heaps of treasure merely cast down at his feet. The Persians are accustomed to present
and receive costly gifts. They understand already how to enrich their friends, but you can teach them to impart
a joy with every gift. How beautiful you are to-day! Are your cushions to your mind, or would you like a
higher seat? But what is that? There are clouds of dust in the direction of the city. Cambyses is surely coming
to meet you! Courage, my daughter. Above all try to meet his gaze and respond to it. Very few can bear the
lightning glance of those eyes, but, if you can return it freely and fearlessly, you have conquered. Fear
nothing, my child, and may Aphrodite adorn you with her most glorious beauty! My friends, we must start, I
think the king himself is coming." Nitetis sat erect in her splendid, gilded carriage; her hands were pressed on
her throbbing heart. The clouds of dust came nearer and nearer, her eye caught the flash of weapons like
lightning across a stormy sky. The clouds parted, she could see single figures for a moment, but soon lost
them as the road wound behind some thickets and shrubs. Suddenly the troop of horsemen appeared in full
gallop only a hundred paces before her, and distinctly visible.
Her first impression was of a motley mass of steeds and men, glittering in purple, gold, silver and jewels. It
consisted in reality of a troop of more than two hundred horsemen mounted on pure white Nicaean horses,
whose bridles and saddle-cloths were covered with bells and bosses, feathers, fringes, and embroidery. Their
leader rode a powerful coal- black charger, which even the strong will and hand of his rider could not always
curb, though in the end his enormous strength proved him the man to tame even this fiery animal. This rider,
beneath whose weight the powerful steed trembled and panted, wore a vesture of scarlet and white, thickly
embroidered with eagles and falcons in silver.
[Curtius III. 3. Xenoph. Cyrap, VIII. 3. 7. Aeschylus, Persians 835. 836. The king's dress and ornaments were
worth 12,000 talents, or L2,250,000 (estimate of 1880) according to Plutarch, Artaxerxes 24.]
The lower part of his dress was purple, and his boots of yellow leather. He wore a golden girdle; in this hung a
short dagger-like sword, the hilt and scabbard of which were thickly studded with jewels. The remaining
ornaments of his dress resembled those we have described as worn by Bartja, and the blue and white fillet of
the Achaemenidae was bound around the tiara, which surmounted a mass of thick curls, black as ebony. The
lower part of his face was concealed by an immense beard. His features were pale and immovable, but the
eyes, (more intensely black, if possible, than either hair or beard), glowed with a fire that was rather scorching
than warming. A deep, fiery-red scar, given by the sword of a Massagetan warrior, crossed his high forehead,
arched nose and thin upper lip. His whole demeanor expressed great power and unbounded pride.
Nitetis' gaze was at once riveted by this man. She had never seen any one like him before, and he exercised a
strange fascination over her. The expression of indomitable pride, worn by his features, seemed to her to
represent a manly nature which the whole world, but she herself above all others, was created to serve. She
felt afraid, and yet her true woman's heart longed to lean upon his strength as the vine upon the elm. She could
CHAPTER XII. 92
not be quite sure whether she had thus pictured to herself the father of all evil, the fearful Seth, or the great
god Ammon, the giver of light.
The deepest pallor and the brightest color flitted by turns across her lovely face, like the light and shadow
when clouds pass swiftly over a sunny noonday sky. She had quite forgotten the advice of her fatherly old
friend, and yet, when Cambyses brought his unruly, chafing steed to a stand by the side of her carriage, she
gazed breathless into the fiery eyes of this man and felt at once that he was the king, though no one had told
her so.
The stern face of this ruler of half the known world relaxed, as Nitetis, moved by an unaccountable impulse,
continued to bear his piercing gaze. At last he waved his hand to her in token of welcome, and then rode on to
her escort, who had alighted from their horses and were awaiting him, some having cast themselves down in
the dust, and others, after the Persian manner, standing in an attitude of deep reverence, their hands concealed
in the wide sleeves of their robes.
He sprang from his horse, an example which was followed at once by his entire suite. The attendants, with the
speed of thought, spread a rich purple carpet on the highway, lest the foot of the king should come in contact
with the dust of the earth, and then Cambyses proceeded to salute his friends and relations by offering them
his mouth to kiss.
He shook Croesus by the right hand, commanding him to remount and accompany him to the carriage, as
interpreter between himself and Nitetis.
In an instant his highest office-bearers were at hand to lift the king once more on to his horse, and at a single
nod from their lord, the train was again in motion.
Cambyses and Croesus rode by the side of the carriage.
"She is beautiful, and pleases me well," began the king. "Interpret faithfully all her answers, for I understand
only the Persian, Assyrian and Median tongues."
Nitetis caught and understood these words. A feeling of intense joy stole into her heart, and before Croesus
could answer, she began softly in broken Persian and blushing deeply: "Blessed be the gods, who have caused
me to find favor in thine eyes. I am not ignorant of the speech of my lord, for the noble Croesus has instructed
me in the Persian language during our long journey. Forgive, if my sentences be broken and imperfect; the
time was short, and my capacity only that of a poor and simple maiden."
[Diodorus tells us that Themistocles learnt the Persian language during the journey to Susa. We are not,
therefore, requiring an impossibility of Nitetis.]
A smile passed over the usually serious mouth of Cambyses. His vanity was flattered by Nitetis' desire to win
his approbation, and, accustomed as he was to see women grow up in idleness and ignorance, thinking of
nothing but finery and intrigue, her persevering industry seemed to him both wonderful and praise worthy. So
he answered with evident satisfaction: "I rejoice that we can speak without an interpreter. Persevere in
learning the beautiful language of my forefathers. Croesus, who sits at my table, shall still remain your
instructor."
"Your command confers happiness!" exclaimed the old man. "No more eager or thankful pupil could be
found, than the daughter of Amasis."
"She justifies the ancient report of the wisdom of Egypt," answered the king, "and I can believe that she will
quickly understand and receive into her soul the religious instructions of our Magi."
CHAPTER XII. 93
Nitetis dropped her earnest gaze. Her fears were being realized. She would be compelled to serve strange
gods.
But her emotion passed unnoticed by Cambyses, who went on speaking: "My mother Kassandane will tell you
the duties expected from my wives. To- morrow I myself will lead you to her. The words, which you
innocently chanced to hear, I now repeat; you please me well. Do nothing to alienate my affection. We will try
to make our country agreeable, and, as your friend, I counsel you to treat Boges whom I sent as my
forerunner, in a kind and friendly manner. As head over the house of the women, you will have to conform to
his will in many things."
"Though he be head over the house of the women," answered Nitetis, "surely your wife is bound to obey no
other earthly will than yours. Your slightest look shall be for me a command; but remember that I am a king's
daughter, that in my native land the weaker and the stronger sex have equal rights, and that the same pride
reigns in my breast, which I see kindling in your eyes, my lord and king! My obedience to you, my husband
and my ruler, shall be that of a slave, but I can never stoop to sue for the favor, or obey the orders of a venal
servant, the most unmanly of his kind!"
Cambyses' wonder and satisfaction increased. He had never heard any woman speak in this way before,
except his mother; the clever way in which Nitetis acknowledged, and laid stress on, his right to command her
every act, was very flattering to his self-love, and her pride found an echo in his own haughty disposition. He
nodded approvingly and answered: "You have spoken well. A separate dwelling shall be appointed you. I, and
no one else, will prescribe your rules of life and conduct. This day the pleasant palace on the hanging-gardens
shall be prepared for your reception."
"A thousand, thousand thanks," cried Nitetis. "You little know the blessing you are bestowing in this
permission. Again and again I have begged your brother Bartja to repeat the story of these gardens, and the
love of the king who raised that verdant and blooming hill, pleased us better than all the other glories of your
vast domains."
"To-morrow," answered the king, "you can enter your new abode. But tell me now how my messengers
pleased you and your countrymen."
"How can you ask? Who could know the noble Croesus without loving him? Who could fail to admire the
beauty of the young heroes, your friends? They have all become dear to us, but your handsome brother Bartja
especially, won all hearts. The Egyptians have no love for strangers, and yet the gaping crowd would burst
into a murmur of admiration, when his beautiful face appeared among them."
At these words the king's brow darkened; he struck his horse so sharply that the creature reared, and then
turning it quickly round he gallopped to the front and soon reached the walls of Babylon.
...........................
Though Nitetis had been brought up among the huge temples and palaces of Egypt, she was still astonished at
the size and grandeur of this gigantic city.
Its walls seemed impregnable; they measured more than seventy-five feet --[Fifty ells. The Greek ell is equal
to one foot and a half English.]-- in height and their breadth was so great, that two chariots could conveniently
drive abreast upon them. These mighty defences were crowned and strengthened by two hundred and fifty
high towers, and even these would have been insufficient, if Babylon had not been protected on one side by
impassable morasses. The gigantic city lay on both shores of the Euphrates. It was more than forty miles in
circumference, and its walls enclosed buildings surpassing in size and grandeur even the Pyramids and the
temples of Thebes.
CHAPTER XII. 94
[These numbers and measurements are taken partly from Herodotus, partly from Diodorus, Strabo and Arrian.
And even the ruins of this giant city, writes Lavard, are such as to allow a very fair conclusion of its enormous
size. Aristotle (Polit. III. I.) says Babylon's dimensions were not those of a city, but of a nation.]
The mighty gates of brass, through which the royal train entered the city, had opened wide to receive this
noble company. This entrance was defended on each side by a strong tower, and before each of these towers
lay, as warder, a gigantic winged bull carved in stone, with a human head, bearded and solemn. Nitetis gazed
at these gates in astonishment, and then a joyful smile lighted up her face, as she looked up the long broad
street so brightly and beautifully decorated to welcome her.
The moment they beheld the king and the gilded carriage, the multitude burst into loud shouts of joy, but
when Bartja, the people's darling, came in sight, the shouts rose to thunder-peals and shrieks of delight, which
seemed as if they would never end. It was long since the populace had seen Cambyses, for in accordance with
Median customs the king seldom appeared in public. Like the Deity, he was to govern invisibly, and his
occasional appearance before the nation to be looked upon as a festival and occasion of rejoicing. Thus all
Babylon had come out to-day to look upon their awful ruler and to welcome their favorite Bartja on his return.
The windows were crowded with eager, curious women, who threw flowers before the approaching train, or
poured sweet perfumes from above as they passed by. The pavement was thickly strewn with myrtle and palm
branches, trees of different kinds had been placed before the house- doors, carpets and gay cloths hung from
the windows, garlands of flowers were wreathed from house to house, fragrant odors of incense and sandalwood
perfumed the air, and the way was lined with thousands of gaping Babylonians dressed in white linen
shirts, gaily-colored woollen petticoats and short cloaks, and carrying long staves headed with pomegranates,
birds, or roses, of gold or silver.
The streets through which the procession moved were broad and straight, the houses on either side, built of
brick, tall and handsome. Towering above every thing else, and visible from all points, rose the gigantic
temple of Bel. Its colossal staircase, like a huge serpent, wound round and round the ever-diminishing series
of stories composing the tower, until it reached the summit crowned by the sanctuary itself.
[This temple of Bel, which many consider may have been the tower of Babel of Genesis XI., is mentioned by
Herodotus I. 181. 182. 183. Diodorus II. 8. 9. (Ktesias), Strabo 738 and many other ancient writers. The
people living in its neighborhood now call the ruins Birs Nimrod, the castle of Nimrod. In the text we have
reconstructed it as far as possible from the accounts of classical writers. The first story, which is still standing,
in the midst of a heap of ruins, is 260 feet high. The walls surrounding the tower are said to be still clearly
recognizable, and were 4000 feet long and 3000 broad. ]
The procession approached the royal palace. This corresponded in its enormous size to the rest of the vast city.
The walls surrounding it were covered with gaily-colored and glazed representations of strange figures made
up of human beings, birds, quadrupeds and fishes; hunting- scenes, battles and solemn processions. By the
side of the river towards the north, rose the hanging-gardens, and the smaller palace lay toward the east on the
other bank of the Euphrates, connected with the larger one by the wondrous erection, a firm bridge of stone.
Our train passed on through the brazen gates of three of the walls surrounding the palace, and then halted.
Nitetis was lifted from her carriage by bearers; she was at last in her new home, and soon after in the
apartments of the women's house assigned to her temporary use.
Cambyses, Bartja and their friends already known to us, were still standing in the gaily-carpeted court of the
palace, surrounded by at least a hundred splendid dignitaries in magnificent dresses, when suddenly a sound
of loud female voices was heard, and a lovely Persian girl richly dressed, her thick fair hair profusely
wreathed with pearls, rushed into the court, pursued by several women older than herself. She ran up to the
group of men; Cambyses with a smile placed himself in her path, but the impetuous girl slipped adroitly past
him, and in another moment was hanging on Bartja's neck, crying and laughing by turns.
CHAPTER XII. 95
The attendants in pursuit prostrated themselves at a respectful distance, but Cambyses, on seeing the caresses
lavished by the young girl on her newly-returned brother, cried: "For shame, Atossa! remember that since you
began to wear ear-rings you have ceased to be a child!
[Ear-rings were given to the Persian girls in their fifteenth year, the marriageable age. Vendid. Farlard XIV.
66. At this age too boys as well as girls were obliged to wear the sacred cord, Kuctl or Kosti as a girdle; and
were only allowed to unloose it in the night. The making of this cord is attended with many ceremonies, even
among the Persians of our own day. Seventy-two threads must be employed, but black wool is prohibited.]
It is right that you should rejoice to see your brother again, but a king's daughter must never forget what is due
to her rank, even in her greatest joy. Go back to your mother directly. I see your attendants waiting yonder. Go
and tell them, that as this is a day of rejoicing I will allow your heedless conduct to pass unpunished, but the
next time you appear unbidden in these apartments, which none may enter without permission, I shall tell
Boges to keep you twelve days in confinement. Remember this, thoughtless child, and tell our mother, Bartja
and I are coming to visit her. Now give me a kiss. You will not? We shall see, capricious little one!" And so
saying the king sprang towards his refractory little sister, and seizing both her hands in one of his own, bent
back her charming head with the other and kissed her in spite of her resistance. She screamed from the
violence of his grasp, and ran away crying to her attendants, who took her back to her apartments.
When Atossa had disappeared, Bartja said; "You were too rough with the little one, Cambyses. She screamed
with pain!"
Once more the king's face clouded, but suppressing the harsh words which trembled on his lips, he only
answered, turning towards the house: "Let us come to our mother now; she begged me to bring you as soon as
you arrived. The women, as usual, are all impatience. Nitetis told me your rosy cheeks and fair curls had
bewitched the Egyptian women too. I would advise you to pray betimes to Mithras for eternal youth, and for
his protection against the wrinkles of age!"
"Do you mean to imply by these words that I have no virtues which could make an old age beautiful?" asked
Bartja.
"I explain my words to no one. Come."
"But I ask for an opportunity of proving, that I am inferior to none of my nation in manly qualities."
"For that matter, the shouts of the Babylonians today will have been proof enough, that deeds are not wanted
from you, in order to win their admiration."
"Cambyses!"
