ABO blood groups Blood group antibodies (A, B,
AB, O) that may destroy red blood cells bearing the antigen
to which they are directed; also called “agglutinins.”
These red-cell antigens are the phenotypic expression of
inherited genes, and the frequency of the four main
groups varies in populations throughout the world.
The antigens of the ABO system are an integral part of
the red-cell membrane as well as all cells throughout the
body and are the most important in transfusion practice.
See also LANDSTEINER, KARL.
abortion The termination of gestation before the
fetus can survive on its own.
abscisic acid (ABA) A plant hormone (C15H20O4)
and weak acid that generally acts to inhibit growth,
induces dormancy, and helps the plant tolerate stressful
conditions by closing stomata. Abscisic acid was
named based on a belief that the hormone caused the
abscission (shedding) of leaves from deciduous trees
during the fall.
At times when a plant needs to slow down growth
and assume a resting (dormant) stage, abscisic acid is
produced in the terminal bud, which slows down
growth and directs the leaf primordia to develop scales
that protect the dormant bud during winter. Because
the hormone also inhibits cell division in the vascular
cambium, both primary and secondary growth are put
on hold during winter.
This hormone also acts as a stress agent that helps
a plant deal with adverse conditions. For example,
ABA accumulates on leaves and causes stomata to
close, reducing the loss of water when a plant begins to
wilt.
In 1963, abscisic acid was first identified and characterized
by Frederick Addicott and colleagues. In
1965, the chemical structure of ABA was defined, and
in 1967, it was formally called abscisic acid.
absorption spectrum Different pigments absorb
light of different wavelengths. For example, chlorophyll
effectively absorbs blue and red. The absorption
spectrum of a pigment is produced by examining,
through the pigment and an instrument called a spectroscope,
a continuous spectrum of radiation. The
energies removed from the continuous spectrum by the
absorbing pigment show up as black lines or bands and
can be graphed.
abyssal zone The portion of the ocean floor below
1,000–2,000 m (3,281–6,561 ft.), where light does not
penetrate and where temperatures are cold and pressures
are intense. It lies seaward of the continental
slope and covers approximately 75 percent of the
ocean floor. The temperature does not rise above 4°C.
Because oxygen is present, a diverse community of
invertebrates and fishes do exist, and some have adapted
to harsh environments such as hydrothermal vents
1
Aof volcanic creation. Food-producing organisms at this
depth are chemoautotrophic prokaryotes and not photosynthetic
producers.
See also OCEANIC ZONE.
acclimatization Acclimatization is the progressive
physiological adjustment or adaptation by an organism
to a change in an environmental factor, such as
temperature, or in conditions that would reduce the
amount of oxygen to its cells. This adjustment can
take place immediately or over a period of days or
weeks. For example, the human body produces more
erythrocytes (red blood cells) in response to low partial
pressures of oxygen at high altitudes; short-term
responses include shivering or sweating in warmblooded
animals.
accommodation The automatic reflex adjustment
that allows the focal length of the lens of an eye to
change to focus on an object. The lens shape, more
convex for near objects and less convex for distant
objects, is caused by ciliary muscles acting on the elastic
property of the lens.
acetylcholine (ACh) One of the most common
neurotransmitters of the vertebrate nervous system,
ACh is a chemical (CH3COOCH2CH2N+(CH3)3) that
transmits impulses between the ends of two adjacent
nerves or neuromuscular junctions. Released by nerve
stimulation (exciting or inhibiting), it is confined largely
to the parasympathetic nervous system, where it diffuses
across the gap of the synapse and stimulates the
adjacent nerve or muscle fiber. It rapidly becomes inactive
by the enzyme cholinesterase, allowing further
impulses to occur.
acetyl CoA A compound formed in the mitochondria
when the thiol group (–SH) of coenzyme A combines
with an acetyl group (CH3CO–). It is important
in the Krebs cycle in cellular respiration and plays a
role in the synthesis and oxidation of fatty acids.
Fritz Albert Lipmann (1899–1986), a biochemist,
is responsible for discovering coenzyme A and cofactor
A, or CoA (A stands for acetylation), in 1947. He
shared the 1953 Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine
with HANS KREBS.
See also KREBS CYCLE.
achiral See CHIRALITY.
acid A chemical capable of donating a HYDRON (proton,
H+) or capable of forming a covalent bond with
an electron pair. An acid increases the hydrogen ion
concentration in a solution, and it can react with certain
metals, such as zinc, to form hydrogen gas. A
strong acid is a relatively good conductor of electricity.
Examples of strong acids are hydrochloric (muriatic),
nitric, sulfuric, while examples of mild acids are sulfurous
and acetic (vinegar). The strength of an acidic
solution is usually measured in terms of its pH (a logarithmic
function of the H+ ion concentration). Strong
acid solutions have low pHs (typically around 0–3),
while weak acid solutions have pHs in the range 3–6.
See also BASE; PH SCALE.
acidity constant The equilibrium constant for splitting
off a HYDRON from a BRØNSTED ACID.
acid-labile sulfide Refers to sulfide LIGANDs, e.g.,
the BRIDGING LIGANDs in IRON–SULFUR PROTEINS,
which are released as H2S at acid pH.
See also FERREDOXIN.
acid precipitation Because pure precipitation (e.g.,
rain) is slightly acidic (due to the reaction between
water droplets and carbon dioxide, creating carbonic
acid) with a potential pH of 5.6, acid precipitation
refers to precipitation with a pH less than 5.6. Acid
precipitation includes rain, fog, snow, and dry deposition.
Anthropogenic (man-made) pollutants (carbon
dioxide, carbon monoxide, ozone, nitrogen and sulfur
oxides, and hydrocarbons) react with water vapor to
produce acid precipitation. These pollutants come primarily
from burning coal and other fossil fuels. Sulfur
dioxide, which reacts readily with water vapor and
droplets (i.e., has a short residence time in the atmosphere
as a gas), has been linked to the weathering
2 acclimatization(eating away) of marble structures and the acidification
of freshwater lakes (consequently killing fish).
Natural interactions within the biosphere can also lead
to acid precipitation.
acoelomate A solid-bodied animal lacking a body
cavity, the space between the gut (digestive tract) and
body wall. Simple animals do not have a body cavity
as higher animals do; this body cavity is called a
coelom in mammals and contains the gut (a cavity by
itself), heart, and lungs, for example. Acoelomates are
bilateral animals and are triploblastic (have three layers:
ectoderm, endoderm, and mesoderm). They can
move forward and have a degree of cephalization
(centralization of neural and sensory organs in the
head).
Representative phyla of acoelomates are the Platyhelminthes:
flatworms that include the Turbellaria
(nonconfined flatworms such as planarians), Monogenea
(monogeneans), Trematoda (trematodes, or flukes),
and Cestoidea (tapeworms). There are more than
20,000 species of flatworms living in wet environments
such as marine or freshwater bodies and damp terrestrial
areas.
See also COELOM.
aconitase A name for citrate (isocitrate) hydro-LYASE
(aconitate hydratase), which catalyzes the interconversion
of citrate, cis-aconitate ((Z)-prop-1-ene-1,2,3-tricarboxylate),
and isocitrate. The active ENZYME
contains a catalytic [4FE-4S] CLUSTER.
acrosome The acrosome is a special area or compartment
that is located at the tip of the head of a
sperm cell. It contains special digestive enzymes that on
contact with the egg help the sperm head penetrate the
egg for fertilization. Directly behind the acrosome is the
haploid nucleus (single set of unpaired chromosomes)
that contains the genetic material.
See also FERTILIZATION.
actin A globular protein found in muscle tissue as
thin filaments and in microfilaments that form portions
of cell cytoskeletons. Actin links into chains, and
paired chains twist helically around each other, forming
microfilaments in muscle and other contractile elements
in cells. Actin and myosin filaments interact to initiate
muscle contraction.
Tropomyosin and troponin are two protein
molecules associated with actin filaments in muscle.
Tropomyosin runs along the length of the actin filament
and covers the area of the actin molecule that
interacts with myosin when at rest. On the other hand,
when a muscle is contracted, tropomyosin is replaced
with troponin as it binds to calcium ions. Troponin is
actin 3
acrosome
The acrosome is a special area or compartment that is located at
the tip of the head of a sperm cell.
Mariposa lily from California. An example of an actinomorphic,
radially symmetrical flower. (Courtesy of Tim McCabe)located at regular intervals along the actin filament and
allows actin to interact with myosin.
See also CYTOSKELETON.
actinomorphic Symmetrical over more than one vertical
plane; e.g., flowers that can be separated into symmetrical
halves along any plane.
action potential A localized rapid change in voltage
that occurs across the membrane of a muscle or nerve
cell when a nerve impulse is initiated. It is caused by a
physicochemical change in the membrane during the
interaction of the flow and exchange of sodium and
potassium ions.
See also DEPOLARIZATION.
active center The location in an ENZYME where the
specific reaction takes place.
active site The active site of an enzyme is the area—
a depressed region comprising a few of the protein’s
amino acids—on a portion of an enzyme that binds to
its substrate. The enzyme’s specificity is based on the
shape of the active area, which can alter itself to snugly
fit the substrate to which it is binding by using weak
chemical bonds.
See ACTIVE CENTER.
active transport The movement of a substance
across a biological membrane, such as living cells,
against a concentration (diffusion) gradient with the
help of metabolic energy, usually provided by ATP
(adenosine triphosphate). Active transport serves to
maintain the normal balance of ions in cells, in particular
ions of sodium and potassium, which play a vital
role in nerve and muscle cells. Because a molecule is
“pumped” across the membrane against its gradient
with the help of metabolic energy, it is referred to as
“active” transport.
The sodium–potassium “pump” that exchanges
sodium (Na+) for potassium (K+) across the plasma
membrane of animal cells is an example of the active
transport mechanism.
It is the carriage of a solute across a biological
membrane from low to high concentration that
requires the expenditure of metabolic energy.
adaptive radiation The process where a population
of plants or animals evolves into a number of different
ones over time, usually as a response to
multiplying and living under different environmental
conditions. Subpopulations from the common ancestor
develop as a response to adapting to the new environmental
conditions, and new species evolve from
this original parent stock.
Impressive rapid adaptive radiations have
occurred over time after mass extinctions caused by
cataclysmic episodes on the Earth. Plate tectonics, volcanism,
and possible Earth-comet-asteroid collisions
all have wiped the landscape clean, allowing survivors
and new species to rapidly fill the voids of these new
adaptive zones.
address-message concept Refers to compounds
in which part of the molecule is required for
binding (address) and part for the biological action
(message).
adenosine 5’-triphosphate (ATP) Key NUCLEOTIDE
in energy-dependent cellular reactions, in combination
with Mg(II). The reaction: ATP + water Ô ADP +
phosphate is used to supply the necessary energy.
See also ATP.
4 actinomorphic
Solanum species as an example of an actinomorphic flower from
Sierra Madre Oriental in Mexico. (Courtesy of Tim McCabe)adenylyl cyclase An enzyme, embedded in the
plasma membrane, that converts ATP to cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cyclic AMP, or cAMP) in
response to a chemical signal. It is activated when a
signal molecule binds to a membrane receptor. Cyclic
AMP acts as a second messenger, relaying the signal
from the membrane to the metabolic machinery of
the cytoplasm.
adrenal glands A pair of small triangular
endocrine glands (one above each kidney in animals)
that are ductless and secrete hormones into
the blood. The glands are composed of two portions.
The adrenal cortex, which forms an outer shell on
each and is controlled by the pituitary gland,
responds to endocrine signals in reacting to stress and
homeostatic conditions by (a) secreting steroid hormones
(corticosteroid, cortisol, and aldosterone) that
deal with carbohydrate metabolism and with salt and
water balance (electrolyte metabolism), such as the
reabsorption of water by the kidneys, and (b) releasing
androgens (male sex hormone) and estrogens
(female sex hormone).
The adrenal cortex surrounds the central medulla,
is controlled by the nervous system, and responds to
nervous inputs resulting from stress and produces
adrenaline and noradrenaline, hormones that increase
blood sugar level and reduce body fat. The adrenal
glands are also known as the suprarenal glands.
See also GLAND.
adrenodoxin A [2FE-2S] FERREDOXIN involved in
electron transfer from NADPH+ (the reduced form of
NADP [nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate,
a coenzyme]), via a REDUCTASE, to CYTOCHROME P-450
in the adrenal gland.
Adrian, Edgar Douglas (1889–1977) British Physiologist
Edgar Douglas Adrian was born on November
30, 1889, in London to Alfred Douglas Adrian, a
legal adviser to the British Local Government Board.
He attended the Westminster School, London, and in
1908 enrolled at Trinity College, Cambridge. At Cambridge
University, he studied physiology, receiving a
bachelor’s degree in 1911.
In 1913 he entered Trinity College, studied
medicine, did his clinical work at St. Bartholomew’s
Hospital, London, and received his M.D. in 1915.
In 1929 he was elected Foulerton professor of the
Royal Society and in 1937 became professor of physiology
at the University of Cambridge until 1951, when
he was elected master of Trinity College, Cambridge.
He was chancellor of the university from 1968 until
two years before his death.
He spent most of his research studying the physiology
of the human nervous system, particularly
the brain, and how neurons send messages. In
1932 he shared the Nobel Prize in physiology
or medicine for his work on the function of the neuron.
He is considered one of the founders of modern
neurophysiology.
He wrote three books, The Basis of Sensation
(1927), The Mechanism of Nervous Action (1932), and
The Physical Basis of Perception (1947), and was
knighted baron of Cambridge in 1955. He died on
August 4, 1977, and is buried at Trinity College.
Adrian, Edgar Douglas 5
Adaptive radiation is the process where a population of plants or
animals evolves into a number of different ones over time, usually
as a response to multiplying and living under different environmental
conditions.aerobic Any organism, environmental condition, or
cellular process that requires atmospheric oxygen. Aerobic
microorganisms, called aerobes, require the presence
of oxygen for growth. An aerobe is capable of
using oxygen as a terminal electron acceptor and can
tolerate oxygen levels higher than that present in the
air (21 percent oxygen). They have a respiratory type
of metabolism, and some aerobes are also capable of
growing anaerobically with electron accepters other
than oxygen.
See also ANAEROBIC.
affinity The tendency of a molecule to associate with
another. The affinity of a DRUG is its ability to bind to
its biological target (RECEPTOR, ENZYME, transport system,
etc.). For pharmacological receptors, it can be
thought of as the frequency with which the drug, when
brought into the proximity of a receptor by diffusion,
will reside at a position of minimum free energy within
the force field of that receptor.
For an AGONIST (or for an ANTAGONIST), the
numerical representation of affinity is the reciprocal of
the equilibrium dissociation constant of the
ligand–receptor complex, denoted KA, calculated as the
rate constant for offset (k–1) divided by the rate constant
for onset (k1).
age structure The relative number of individuals of
each age in a population, or the composition of a country
by age groups. Since generations coexist over a time
period, an age structure develops and is important in
foreseeing the growth rate of an entire population.
Except for the “baby boom” generation of the late
1940s–50s, the United States has a pretty even age
distribution.
Agnatha A superclass family of jawless vertebrate
fish that probably originated during the late Precambrian
or early Cambrian. This superclass is the source of
the oldest vertebrate fossils, dating some 465 million
years ago during the Paleozoic era. Early agnathans,
such as the now extinct ostracoderms, were encased in
bony plates. While most were small, no larger than 20
in., they lacked paired fins and had circular mouths or
slits with no jaws, although there were exceptions that
had paired fins. Agnathans were most likely bottomdwelling
mud suckers or suspension feeders, taking in
food through the mouth and then trapped in the gill,
which also functioned as the area for gas exchange.
Only about 60 species comprising two classes of
agnathans exist today, while the rest declined and disappeared
during the Devonian period. Two classes, the
Myxini (hagfishes) and Cephalaspidormorphi (lampreys),
are all that remain.
Both hagfishes and lampreys lack paired
appendages and lack body armor. Hagfishes are scavengers,
living only in salt water and feeding on dead
fish or marine worms, and lack a larval stage. Lampreys
use their round mouth and a rasping tongue to
latch on the side of a fish, penetrate the skin, and ingest
its blood. As larvae, they live in freshwater streams, are
suspension feeders, and migrate to the sea and lakes
when they become adults. Some species only feed while
in the larval stage, reproduce, and die. The agnathans
are considered the most primitive living vertebrates
known today.
agonist An endogenous substance or a DRUG that
can interact with a RECEPTOR and initiate a physiological
or a pharmacological response characteristic of that
RECEPTOR (contraction, relaxation, secretion, ENZYME
activation, etc.).
agonistic behavior This behavior usually involves
two animals in a competitive contest, which can be in
the form of combat, threat, or ritual, for food, a sexual
partner, or other need. The end result is one becoming
a victor while the other surrenders or becomes submissive,
both exhibiting different traits. When one surrenders,
it stops the combat because the continued battle
could end up injuring both. Likewise, any future combat
between the two individuals will likely end with the
same result as the first and will not last as long.
Many animal social groups are maintained by agonistic
behavior where one individual becomes dominant,
others become subdominant, and so on down the
line, each controlling the others in a dominance hierarchy
or “pecking order.” This dominant behavior can be
used to control access to food or mates. Chickens,
gorillas, and wolves are good examples of social groups
maintained by dominance.
6 aerobicAgonistic behavior is used to defend territories,
areas that a dominant individual will defend for feeding,
mating, rearing, or any combination of these activities.
AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) AIDS
is the name given to the late stages of HIV infection,
first discovered in 1981 in Los Angeles, California. By
1983 the retrovirus responsible for it, the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), was first described, and
since then millions around the world have died from
contracting the disease. It is thought to have originated
in central Africa from monkeys or to have developed
from contaminated vaccines used in the world’s first
mass immunization for polio.
AIDS is acquired mostly by sexual contact either
through homo- or heterosexual practice by having
unprotected sex via vaginal or anal intercourse. The
routes of infection include infected blood, semen, and
vaginal fluid. The virus can also be transmitted by
blood by-products, through maternofetal infection
(where the virus is transmitted by an infected mother to
the unborn child in the uterus), or by maternal blood
during parturition, or by breast milk consumption
upon birth. Intravenous drug abuse also is a cause.
The virus destroys a subgroup of lymphocytes,
essential for combating infections, known as the helper
T cells, or CD4 lymphocytes, and suppresses the body’s
immune system, leaving it prone to infection.
Infection by the virus produces antibodies, but not
all those exposed develop chronic infection. For those
that do, AIDS or AIDS-related complex (ARC) bring
on a variety of ailments involving the lymph nodes,
intermittent fever, loss of weight, diarrheas, fatigue,
pneumonia, and tumors. A person infected, known as
HIV-positive, can remain disease-free for up to 10
years, as the virus can remain dormant before fullblown
AIDS develops.
While HIV has been isolated from bodily fluids
such as semen to breast milk, the virus does not survive
outside the body, and it is considered highly unlikely
that ordinary social contact can spread the disease.
However, the medical profession has developed high
standards to deal with handling blood, blood products,
and body fluids from HIV-infected people.
In the early discovery stage of the disease, AIDS
was almost certainly fatal, but the development of
antiviral drugs, such as zidovudine (AZT), didanosine
(ddl), zalcitabine (ddc), lamivudine (3TC), stavudine
(DAT), and protease inhibitors used in combination
with the others, has showed promise in slowing or
eradicating the disease. Initial problems with finding a
cure have to do with the fact that glycoproteins encasing
the virus display a great deal of variability in their
amino acid sequences, making it difficult to prepare a
specific AIDS vaccine.
During the 1980s and 1990s, an AIDS epidemic
brought considerable media coverage to the disease,
especially as well-known celebrities such as actors
Rock Hudson and Anthony Perkins, Liberace, and
others died from it. Hudson was the first to admit having
the disease in 1985. During the 1980s and 1990s,
the homosexual community became active in lobbying
for funds to study the disease, as it early on was considered
simply a “gay” disease. ACT UP, acronym for
the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power, began as a
grassroots AIDS organization associated with nonviolent
civil disobedience in 1987. ACT UP became the
standard-bearer for protest against governmental and
AIDS 7
matrix capsid RNA viral proteins viral envelope enzymes
AIDS was first reported in 1981 in the United States and has since
become a major epidemic, killing nearly 12 million people and
infecting more than 30 million others worldwide. The disease is
caused by HIV, a virus that destroys the body’s ability to fight
infections and certain cancers. (Courtesy of Darryl Leja, NHGRI,
National Institutes of Health)societal indifference to the AIDS epidemic. Public attitude
changed when heterosexuals became infected, and
greater education on the causes of the disease became
more widespread, initiated by celebrities such as Elizabeth
Taylor and the American Foundation for AIDS
Research, where fundraising activities made national
news coverage.
There have been significant advances in the treatment
for HIV/AIDS by attacking the virus itself,
strengthening the immune system, and controlling
AIDS-related cancers and opportunistic infections. At
present, there is still no cure or vaccine.
albumin A type of protein, especially a protein of
blood PLASMA, that transports various substances,
including metal ions, drugs, and XENOBIOTICs.
aldehydes Aldehydes are organic chemicals that contain
the –CHO (aldehyde) group, a carbonyl group
(C=O) that has the carbon and hydrogen atom bound.
They are the result of the oxidation of alcohols and,
when further oxidized, form carboxylic acids.
Methanal (formaldehyde) and ethanal (acetaldehyde)
are common examples.
aldosterone An adrenal steroid hormone, derived
from cholesterol, that is secreted by the adrenal cortex
and acts on the distal tubules of the kidney to control
the elimination of salts and water by the kidneys. The
presence of the pituitary hormone ACTH, changing
levels of sodium and potassium, and variations in
blood volume stimulate the production of aldosterone
by the cortex.
Aldosterone is a component of the renninangiotensin-
aldosterone system (RAAS) that is a complex
feedback system that functions in homeostasis.
See also GLAND.
algae (singular, alga) A large and diverse group of
photosynthetic organisms formerly called simple plants
but now members of their own phyla, the Protoctista,
that also includes the slime molds and protozoa. Algae,
some 17,000 species or more, live in aquatic and moist
inland regions. They do not have roots, stems, or leaves
and have no vascular water-conducting systems. They
reproduce by spores, and in some species the spores are
mobile with the use of flagella. They range from simple
single cells (e.g., Euglena) to “plants” many feet long
(e.g., kelps such as Macrocytis) and make up marine
seaweed and much of the plankton that provide food
for other species.
Unusual growth outbursts result in “algal blooms”
or “red tides” and occur when there is an increase in
nutrient levels in a body of water.
Cyanophyta, or blue-green algae, are now classified
as cyanobacteria. The phylum Cyanophyta also
includes chloroxybacteria. Cyanophytes contain phycocyanin,
a photosynthetic pigment giving them a blue
color. The red pigment phycoerythrin is also almost
always present. They are diverse and can live as single
cells or as colonies or large filaments. Some are nitrogen
fixers in soil and others, like lichens, display symbiosis
with a fungus, usually with a member of
Ascomycota. The fungus provides the host plant for the
algae cells that are distributed throughout and provide
food to the fungus while the fungus protects the algae
8 albumin
HIV-infected white blood cell. Scanning electron micrograph
(SEM) of the abnormal surface of a white blood cell infected with
HIV virus that causes AIDS. Glycosaminoglycan (GAG) gene
expression for cell surface proteins is abnormal. The HIV virus’s
genetic material controls the cell, forcing it to express abnormal
structural proteins. Normally these surface GAG proteins are tiny
spheres, but here the cell’s outer surface is formed from large
irregular rods. HIV causes AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome). AIDS destroys white blood cells, leading to a weakened
immune system. Magnification: × 6600 at 4.5 × 5.5 inch size.
(Courtesy © NIBSC/Photo Researchers, Inc.)cells. While many lichen have a different fungi component,
they often have the same algae species. Some
common species of lichens are British soldiers (Cladonia
cristatella), pixie cups (Cladonia grayi), cedar
lichen (Vulpicidia viridis), wrinkled shield lichen
(Flavoparmelia caperata), and reindeer lichen (Cladina
subtenuis).
The chloroxybacteria, or green-grass bacteria, contain
both chlorophylls a and b but do not contain the
red or blue pigments of the blue-green algae. They are
nonmotile, aerobic organisms.
Other phyla of algae include the Bacillariophyceae,
comprising the diatoms; Charophyceae, fresh- or
brackish- water algae that resemble bryophytes;
Chlorophyceae, or green algae believed to be the progenitor
of plants; Chrysophyceae, or yellow-green
algae; Dinophyceae, unicellular algae with two flagella;
Phaeophyceae, or brown algae; and Rhodophyceae, or
red algae.
The Bacillariophyceae or diatoms are unicellular
algae that are found in single, colonial, or filamentous
states. Under the microscope they often are beautifully
symmetrical, as their cell walls, or frustules, are composed
of silica and are bivalved, one of which overlaps
the other, and the frustule is often punctated and
ornamented. The two orders, Centrales and Pennales,
occupy two different environments. The centric
diatoms (Centrales) are circular in shape with radial
symmetry and live mostly in marine environments.
The pennate diatoms (Pennales) are elliptical in shape,
have bilateral symmetry, and are found in freshwater
environments.
Deposits of fossil diatoms known as diatomaceous
earth have been mined and used for years in paints,
abrasives, and other products such as chalk. The
famous White Cliffs of Dover in England (rising to 300
feet) are composed of massive amounts of diatoms—
coccoliths—that were laid down some 790 million
years ago when Great Britain was submerged by a shallow
sea.
The Charophyceae, also known as stoneworts, and
which resemble bryophytes, live in fresh and brackish
water especially rich in calcium, where they become
stiff and lime encrusted. The stoneworts consist of a
complex branched thallus with an erect stemlike structure
and many whorls of short branches.
The Chlorophyceae (or green algae) are the closest
to plants in pigment composition and structure and are
related based on a common ancestor. More than 7,000
species live in freshwater and marine environments as
unicellular parts of plankton, in damp soil and even
snow as colonies or filaments, symbiotically with other
eukaryotes, or mutually with fungi as lichens.
The Chrysophyceae or golden algae, named
because of their yellow and brown carotene and xanthophyll
pigments, are typically cells with two flagella
at one end of the cell, and many live among freshwater
and marine plankton. While most are unicellular, a few
are colonial.
The Dinophyceae or dinoflagellates are algae that
are unicellular with two flagella of unequal length contained
in channels on the cell surface. They can change
shape with different water temperatures and are very
tolerant of chemical and physical conditions.
The Phaeophyceae or brown algae are the largest
and most complex of the algae. All members are multicellular,
and the majority live in marine environments,
especially common in cool water along temperate coastlines.
Many of the marine seaweeds are brown algae.
The Rhodophyceae or red algae are more recent
and have lost their flagellate stages in their life cycle.
Some species are actually black and not red, as those
that live deeper in waters, because of different levels of
the pigment phycoerythrin. While most are found in
warm coastal waters of the tropical oceans, some also
live in freshwater and on land in the soil. Most
rhodophytes are multicellular, sharing seaweed status
with brown algae.
algae 9
Spirogyra is a filamentous algae that can be found in almost every
pond or ditch. (Courtesy of Hideki Horikami)Because the various forms of algae are now
assigned to different phyla, the words alga and algae
are used informally and have no taxonomic status.
allantois During the embryonic stage of mammals,
birds, and reptiles, the allantois, a small sac, is one of
four extra-embryonic membranes (along with amnion,
yolk sac, chorion) and serves several functions, such as
a repository for the embryo’s nitrogenous waste (chiefly
uric acid) in reptiles and birds (in the egg). The allantois
provides oxygen to mammals, birds, and reptiles,
as well as food in mammals (via the placenta).
The membrane of the allantois works with the
chorion in respiratory functions, allowing the exchange
of gases between the embryo and surrounding air. In
humans, it is involved in the development of the urinary
bladder.
See also EMBRYO.
allele An allele is one of two or more alternative forms
of a gene that can exist at a single locus. Each allele
therefore has a unique nucleotide sequence and may lead
to different phenotypes for a given trait. If the alleles for
a gene are identical, the organism is called homozygous.
If the alleles are different, the organism is heterozygous.
If two alleles are different, one becomes dominant
and is fully expressed in appearance in the organism,
while the other is recessive and has no noticeable effect
on the appearance of the organism.
This is shown in the color of your eyes, determined
by the genes inherited from your parents. The gene for
brown eyes is dominant and overrides genes for other
eye colors. The gene for blue eyes is recessive and will
appear when there are no genes for other eye colors. A
person with brown eyes may have a recessive, or “hidden,”
gene for blue eyes. Therefore, two brown-eyed
parents may each give a recessive gene for blue eyes to
their child, who would then have blue eyes. Gray,
green, and other eye colors result from a complex mixing
of different eye color genes.
See also GENE.
Allen’s Rule In warm-blooded animals, the warmer
the climate, the longer the appendages (ears, legs, wings)
as compared with closely related taxa from colder areas.
10 allantois
alleles alleles alleles
black eyes black eyes white eyes black eyes
X X
Eb Eb
X X
Eb Ew
X Y
Ew
X Y
Eb
An allele is one of the variant forms of a gene at a particular locus, or location, on a chromosome. Different alleles produce variation in
inherited characteristics such as hair color or blood type. In an individual, one form of the allele (the dominant one) may be expressed
more than another form (the recessive one). (Courtesy of Darryl Leja, NHGRI, National Institutes of Health)allochronic speciation Speciation that takes place
related to time rather than space; populations that are
reproductively isolated due to mating at different times.
See also SPECIATION.
allometric growth The variation in the relative rates
of growth of various parts of the body, which helps
shape the organism. In other words, it is the pattern of
growth whereby different parts of the body grow at
different rates with respect to each other. Allometry is
the study of relative growth and of changes in proportion
with increase in size. For example, human arms
and legs grow at a faster rate than the body and head,
making adult proportions strikingly different from
those of infants. Another striking example is the male
fiddler crab Uca pugnax. In small males, the two claws
are of equal weight, each weighing about 8 percent of
the total crab weight. However, as the crab enlarges, its
large crushing claw grows more rapidly, eventually
constituting about 38 percent of the crab’s weight.
In 1932, Sir Julian Huxley described a simple
mathematical method for the detection and measurement
of the allometric growth. In order to compare the
relative growth of two components (one of which may
be the whole body), they are plotted logarithmically on
x- and y-axes:
log y = log b + k log x
The slope of the resulting regression is called the
allometric growth ratio, often designated as k.
k = 1, both components are growing at the same
rate.
k < 1, the component represented on the y-axis is
growing more slowly than the component on the xaxis.
k > 1, the y-axis component is growing faster than
the x-axis component.
Another formula for measuring allometric growth is
Y=bxa, where Y is equal to the mass of the organ, x =
mass of the organism, a = growth coefficient of the
organ, and b = a constant.
Yet another formula for measuring allometric
growth is Y = bxa/c, where a and c are the growth rates
for two body parts.
Allometric growth studies have also been applied
to animal husbandry, archaeology, and urban systems
studies.
allometry The study of relative growth and of
changes in proportion with increase in size.
allopatric speciation One of two methods of speciation
(the other is sympatric), allopatric speciation happens
when the ancestral population becomes segregated
by a geographical barrier. The Karner blue butterfly
(Lycaeides melissa samualis) became allopatric from its
parent the Melissa blue butterfly (Lycaeides melissa
melissa) when the climate changed and restricted various
populations along its range to northeastern pine
barrens environments several thousand years ago. As
populations become isolated, the isolated gene pools
accumulate different genetic traits by microevolution.
Small populations are more likely to evolve into separate
species than larger isolated populations. Several
populations of the Karner blue butterfly are now separated
from each other by human-made development
and may be evolving into separate subspecies or
species, even though geographically they are isolated by
only a few miles in some cases.
Conditions that favor allopatric speciation are
when one population becomes isolated at the fringe of
the parent population’s range. This splinter population,
called a peripheral isolate, is likely to become allopatric
because the gene pool of the isolate may already be different,
since living on the border of the range encourages
the expression of the extremes of any genotypic
CLINEs that existed in the original population. Furthermore,
if the population is small enough, a FOUNDER
EFFECT will occur, giving rise to a gene pool that is not
that of the parent population.
Genetic drift will also occur until the peripheral
isolate becomes a larger population and will continue
to change the gene pool at random until the population
grows. New mutations or combinations of existing
alleles that are neutral in adaptive value now may
become fixed in the population by chance, causing
genotypic or phenotypic divergence from the parent
population. For example, the Karner blue butterfly has
a row of orange spots on the top of the hindwing,
whereas, the ancestral parent, the Melissa blue butterfly,
has orange spots on the top of both front and hindwing,
a phenotypic variation.
Another factor in causing allopatric speciation is
that evolution via natural selection may take a different
road in the peripheral population. The isolate will
allopatric speciation 11encounter selection factors that are different from and
perhaps more severe than that experienced by the parent
because the isolate is living in an environment
slightly, or completely, different from that of the
parent. These small isolated populations are not guaranteed
to become new species, as they are more often
likely to become extinct, yet it is clear in evolutionary
history that allopatric speciation does occur.
See also SPECIATION.
allopolyploid A type of polyploid (having a nucleus
that contains more than two sets of chromosomes)
species, often a plant, resulting from two different
species interbreeding and combining their chromosomes.
Hybrids are often sterile because they do not
have sets of homologous chromosomes, making pairing
nonexistent unless two diploid hybrids double the
chromosome numbers, resulting in a fertile allotetraploid
that now contains two sets of homologous
chromosomes. Plant breeders find that this is
beneficial, since it is possible to breed the advantages
of different species into one. Triticale (a “new” grain
created by crossing rye and durum wheat) is an
allopolyploid that was developed from wheat and rye.
Some crops are naturally allopolyploid, such as cotton,
oats, tall fescue, potatoes, wheat, and tobacco. It is
estimated that half of all angiosperms (flowering
plants) are polyploid.
allosteric binding sites A type of binding site contained
in many ENZYMEs and RECEPTORs. As a consequence
of the binding to allosteric binding sites, the
interaction with the normal ligand (ligands are
molecules that bind to proteins) may be either
enhanced or reduced. Ligand binding can change the
shape of a protein.
allosteric effector Specific small molecules that bind
to a protein at a site other than a catalytic site and that
modulate (by activation or INHIBITION) the biological
activity.
allosteric enzyme An ENZYME that contains a
region, separate from the region that binds the SUBSTRATE
for catalysis, where a small regulatory molecule
binds and affects that catalytic activity. This effector
molecule may be structurally unrelated to the substrate,
or it may be a second molecule of substrate. If the catalytic
activity is enhanced by binding, the effector is
called an activator; if it is diminished, the effector is
called an INHIBITOR.
allosteric regulation The regulation of the activity
of allosteric ENZYMEs.
See also ALLOSTERIC BINDING SITES; ALLOSTERIC
ENZYME.
allosteric site A specific receptor site on an enzyme
molecule not on the active site (the site on the surface
of an enzyme molecule that binds the substrate
molecule). Molecules bind to the allosteric site and
change the shape of the active site, either enabling the
substrate to bind to the active site or prevent the binding
of the substrate.
The molecule that binds to the allosteric site is an
inhibitor because it causes a change in the three-dimensional
structure of the enzyme that prevents the substrate
from binding to the active site.
allozyme An enzyme form, a variant of the same
enzyme (protein) that is coded for by different alleles at
a single locus.
See also ENZYME.
alpha helix Most proteins contain one or more
stretches of amino acids that take on a particular shape
in three-dimensional space. The most common forms
are alpha helix and beta sheet.
Alpha helix is spiral shaped, constituting one form
of the secondary structure of proteins, arising from a
specific hydrogen-bonding structure; the carbonyl
group (–C=O) of each peptide bond extends parallel to
the axis of the helix and points directly at the –N–H
group of the peptide bond four amino acids below it in
the helix. A hydrogen bond forms between them
[–N–H . . . . . O=C–] and plays a role in stabilizing the
helix conformation. The alpha helix is right-handed
and twists clockwise, like a corkscrew, and makes a
12 allopolyploidencounter selection factors that are different from and
perhaps more severe than that experienced by the parent
because the isolate is living in an environment
slightly, or completely, different from that of the
parent. These small isolated populations are not guaranteed
to become new species, as they are more often
likely to become extinct, yet it is clear in evolutionary
history that allopatric speciation does occur.
See also SPECIATION.
allopolyploid A type of polyploid (having a nucleus
that contains more than two sets of chromosomes)
species, often a plant, resulting from two different
species interbreeding and combining their chromosomes.
Hybrids are often sterile because they do not
have sets of homologous chromosomes, making pairing
nonexistent unless two diploid hybrids double the
chromosome numbers, resulting in a fertile allotetraploid
that now contains two sets of homologous
chromosomes. Plant breeders find that this is
beneficial, since it is possible to breed the advantages
of different species into one. Triticale (a “new” grain
created by crossing rye and durum wheat) is an
allopolyploid that was developed from wheat and rye.
Some crops are naturally allopolyploid, such as cotton,
oats, tall fescue, potatoes, wheat, and tobacco. It is
estimated that half of all angiosperms (flowering
plants) are polyploid.
allosteric binding sites A type of binding site contained
in many ENZYMEs and RECEPTORs. As a consequence
of the binding to allosteric binding sites, the
interaction with the normal ligand (ligands are
molecules that bind to proteins) may be either
enhanced or reduced. Ligand binding can change the
shape of a protein.
allosteric effector Specific small molecules that bind
to a protein at a site other than a catalytic site and that
modulate (by activation or INHIBITION) the biological
activity.
allosteric enzyme An ENZYME that contains a
region, separate from the region that binds the SUBSTRATE
for catalysis, where a small regulatory molecule
binds and affects that catalytic activity. This effector
molecule may be structurally unrelated to the substrate,
or it may be a second molecule of substrate. If the catalytic
activity is enhanced by binding, the effector is
called an activator; if it is diminished, the effector is
called an INHIBITOR.
allosteric regulation The regulation of the activity
of allosteric ENZYMEs.
See also ALLOSTERIC BINDING SITES; ALLOSTERIC
ENZYME.
allosteric site A specific receptor site on an enzyme
molecule not on the active site (the site on the surface
of an enzyme molecule that binds the substrate
molecule). Molecules bind to the allosteric site and
change the shape of the active site, either enabling the
substrate to bind to the active site or prevent the binding
of the substrate.
The molecule that binds to the allosteric site is an
inhibitor because it causes a change in the three-dimensional
structure of the enzyme that prevents the substrate
from binding to the active site.
allozyme An enzyme form, a variant of the same
enzyme (protein) that is coded for by different alleles at
a single locus.
See also ENZYME.
alpha helix Most proteins contain one or more
stretches of amino acids that take on a particular shape
in three-dimensional space. The most common forms
are alpha helix and beta sheet.
Alpha helix is spiral shaped, constituting one form
of the secondary structure of proteins, arising from a
specific hydrogen-bonding structure; the carbonyl
group (–C=O) of each peptide bond extends parallel to
the axis of the helix and points directly at the –N–H
group of the peptide bond four amino acids below it in
the helix. A hydrogen bond forms between them
[–N–H . . . . . O=C–] and plays a role in stabilizing the
helix conformation. The alpha helix is right-handed
and twists clockwise, like a corkscrew, and makes a
12 allopolyploidcomplete turn every 3.6 amino acids. The distance
between two turns is 0.54 nm. However, an alpha helix
can also be left-handed. Most enzymes contain sections
of alpha helix.
The alpha helix was discovered by Linus Pauling in
1948.
See also HELIX.
alternation of generations A life cycle in plants
where there is both a multicellular diploid form (the
sporophyte generation) and a multicellular haploid
form (the gametophyte generation).
Gametophytes produce haploid gametes that fuse
zygotes that are forming. These zygotes then develop
into diploid sporophytes. Meiosis in the sporophytes
produces haploid spores, with division by meiosis giving
rise to the next generation of gametophytes.
Alternation of generations occurs in plants and certain
species of ALGAE. Ferns and fern allies (such as the
club moss) are common examples that display alternation
of generations. The above ground parent fern
plant (the diploid sporophyte, or spore-bearing plant)
has two full sets of chromosomes (two of each kind of
chromosome). It sheds its single-celled haploid spores,
having one set of chromosomes (one of each kind),
which fall to the ground, and these in turn grow into a
different plant, the gametophyte or prothallus, also
haploid. The gametophyte has special bodies within the
plant called archegonia (female cells) and antheridia
(male cells). Here sexual fertilization takes place, and a
new diploid sporophyte then grows.
There are four main groups of plants considered to
be “fern allies,” a diverse group of vascular plants that
are neither flowering plants nor ferns and that reproduce
by shedding spore to initiate an alternation of
generations. These are the Lycophyta (Lycopsida, the
club mosses; Selaginellopsida, the spike mosses; and
Isoëtopsida, the quillworts); the Archeophyta
(Sphenopsida, the horsetails and scouring-rushes;
Psilopsida, the whiskbrooms; and Ophioglossopsida,
the adder’s-tongues and grape-ferns); the Pteridophyta
(ferns); and Spermatophyta (flowering plants).
In some examples of alternation of generations—for
example, in certain algae species such as in some green
or brown forms—the alternation of generations takes
on two different approaches. Where the sporophytes
and gametophytes are structurally different, the two
generations are heteromorphic. If the sporophytes and
gametophytes look the same and have different chromosome
pairs, the generations are said to be isomorphic.
altruistic behavior The aiding of another individual
at one’s own risk or expense. This can be in the form of
one animal sending out a distress call to warn others of
impending trouble, although putting itself in danger by
giving out its location. Strangers coming to the rescue
of other strangers, such as victims in an accident, hurricane,
or earthquake, is another example of altruistic
behavior.
alveolus (plural, alveoli) Latin for “hollow cavity.”
There are several definitions for alveolus. It is a thin,
multilobed air sac that exchanges gases in the lungs of
mammals and reptiles at the end of each bronchiole, a
very fine respiratory tube in the lungs. An alveolus is
lined with many blood capillaries where the exchange
of carbon dioxide and oxygen takes place.
It is also the name given to the socket in the jawbone
in which a tooth is rooted by means of the periodontal
membrane, the connective tissue that
surrounds the root and anchors it.
Furthermore, it is the term used to describe a single
hexagonal beehive cell found in a honeycomb. It is also
the term that refers to the milk-secreting sacs of the
mammary gland.
ambidentate LIGANDs, such as (NCS)–, that can
bond to a CENTRAL ATOM through either of two or
more donor atoms.
amicyanin An ELECTRON TRANSFER PROTEIN containing
a TYPE 1 COPPER site, isolated from certain bacteria.
amino acid An organic molecule possessing both
acidic carboxylic acid (–COOH) and basic amino
(–NH2) groups attached to the same tetrahedral carbon
atom.
Amino acids are the principal building blocks of
proteins and enzymes. They are incorporated into
amino acid 13proteins by transfer RNA according to the genetic
code while messenger RNA is being decoded by ribosomes.
The amino acid content dictates the spatial
and biochemical properties of the protein or enzyme
during and after the final assembly of a protein.
Amino acids have an average molecular weight of
about 135 daltons. While more than 50 have been discovered,
20 are essential for making proteins, long
chains of bonded amino acids.
Some naturally occurring amino acids are alanine,
arginine, asparagine, aspartic acid, cysteine, glutamine,
glutamic acid, glycine, histidine, isoleucine, leucine,
lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, proline, serine, threonine,
tryptophan, tyrosine, and valine.
The two classes of amino acids that exist are based
on whether the R-group is hydrophobic or hydrophilic.
Hydrophobic or nonpolar amino acids tend to repel the
aqueous environment and are located mostly in the
interior of proteins. They do not ionize or participate
in the formation of hydrogen bonds. On the other
hand, the hydrophilic or polar amino acids tend to
interact with the aqueous environment, are usually
involved in the formation of hydrogen bonds, and are
usually found on the exterior surfaces of proteins or in
their reactive centers. It is for this reason that certain
amino acid R-groups allow enzyme reactions to occur.
The hydrophilic amino acids can be further subdivided
into polar with no charge, polar with negatively
charged side chains (acidic), and polar with positively
charged side chains (basic).
While all amino acids share some structural similarities,
it is the side groups, or “R”-groups as they are
called, that make the various amino acids chemically
and physically different from each other so that they
react differently with the environment. These groupings,
found among the 20 naturally occurring amino acids,
are ionic (aspartic acid, arginine, glutamic acid, lysine,
and histidine), polar (asparagine, serine, threonine, cysteine,
tyrosine, and glutamine), and nonpolar amino
acids (alanine, glycine, valine, leucine, isoleucine,
methionine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, and proline).
Amino acids are also referred to as amphoteric,
meaning they can react with both acids and alkali,
which makes them effective buffers in biological systems.
A buffer is a solution where the pH usually stays
constant when an acid or base is added.
In 1986 scientists found a 21st amino acid, selenocysteine.
In 2002 two teams of researchers from Ohio
State University identified the 22nd genetically encoded
amino acid, called pyrrolysine, a discovery that is the
biological equivalent of physicists finding a new fundamental
particle or chemists discovering a new element.
Amino acid supplements are widely used in exercise
and dietary programs.
See also PROTEIN.
amino acid residue (in a polypeptide) When two
or more amino acids combine to form a peptide, the
elements of water are removed, and what remains of
each amino acid is called amino acid residue. Amino
acid residues are therefore structures that lack a hydrogen
atom of the amino group (–NH–CHR–COOH),
or the hydroxy moiety of the carboxy group
(NH2–CHR–CO–), or both (–NH–CHR–CO–); all
units of a peptide chain are therefore amino acid
residues. (Residues of amino acids that contain two
amino groups or two carboxy groups may be joined by
isopeptide bonds, and so may not have the formulas
14 amino acid residue
Phe
NH2
H C COOH
R
amino group
R group
acidic
carboxyl
group
Leu Ser Cys
amino acids
Amino acids comprise a group of 20 different kinds of small
molecules that link together in long chains to form proteins. Often
referred to as the “building blocks” of proteins. (Courtesy of
Darryl Leja, NHGRI, National Institutes of Health)shown.) The residue in a peptide that has an amino
group that is free, or at least not acylated by another
amino acid residue (it may, for example, be acylated
or formylated), is called N-terminal; it is the Nterminus.
The residue that has a free carboxy group,
or at least does not acylate another amino acid
residue (it may, for example, acylate ammonia to give
–NH–CHR–CO–NH2), is called C-terminal.
The following is a list of symbols for amino acids
(use of the one-letter symbols should be restricted to
the comparison of long sequences):
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) When ribosomes
pair a tRNA (transfer ribonucleic acid) with a
codon (three bases in a DNA or RNA sequence), an
amino acid is expected to be carried by the tRNA.
Since each tRNA is matched with its amino acid
before it meets the ribosome, the ribosome has no
way of knowing if the match was made. The match is
made by a family of enzymes called aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases. These enzymes charge each tRNA with
the proper amino acid via a covalent ester bond,
allowing each tRNA to make the proper translation
from the genetic code of DNA into the amino acid
code of proteins. Cells make at least 20 different
aminoacyl-tRNS synthetases, one for each of the
amino acids.
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases belong to two
classes, depending on which amino acid they specify.
Class I enzymes usually are monomeric and attach to
the carobxyl of their specific amino acid to the 2’ OH
of adenosine 76 in the tRNA molecule. Class II
enzymes are either dimeric or tetrameric and attach
to their amino acids at the 3’ OH. These enzymes
catalyze first by activating the amino acid by forming
an aminoacyl-adenylate. Here the carboxyl of the
amino acid is linked to the alpha-phosphate of ATP,
displacing pyrophosphate. After the corrected tRNA
is bound, the aminoacyl group of the aminoacyladenylate
is transferred to the 2’ or 3’ terminal OH
of the tRNA.
Recent studies have shown that aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases can tell the difference between the right and
the wrong tRNA before they ever start catalysis, and if
the enzyme binds aminoacyl-adenylate first, it is even
more specific during tRNA binding. Previous studies
have also proved that aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
reject wrong tRNAs during catalysis. Other research
has shown that specific aaRSs play roles in cellular
fidelity, tRNA processing, RNA splicing, RNA trafficking,
apoptosis, and transcriptional and translational
regulation. These new revelations may present new
evolutionary models for the development of cells and
perhaps opportunities for pharmaceutical advancements.
amino group (–NH2) A functional group (group of
atoms within a molecule that is responsible for certain
properties of the molecule and reactions in which it
takes part), common to all amino acids, that consists of
a nitrogen atom bonded covalently to two hydrogen
atoms, leaving a lone valence electron on the nitrogen
atom capable of bonding to another atom. It can act as
a base in solution by accepting a hydrogen ion and carrying
a charge of +1. Any organic compound that has
an amino group is called an amine and is a derivative
of the inorganic compound ammonia, NH3. A primary
amine has one hydrogen atom replaced, such as in the
amino group. A secondary amine has two hydrogens
replaced. A tertiary amine has all three hydrogens
replaced. Amines are created by decomposing organic
matter.
amino group 15
A Ala Alanine
B Asx Asparagine or aspartic acid
C Cys Cysteine
D Asp Aspartic acid
E Glu Glutamic acid
F Phe Phenylalanine
G Gly Glycine
H His Histidine
I Ile Isoleucine
K Lys Lysine
L Leu Leucine
M Met Methionine
N Asn Asparagine
P Pro Proline
Q Gln Glutamine
R Arg Arginine
S Ser Serine
T Thr Threonine
V Val Valine
W Trp Tryptophan
Y Tyr Tyrosine
Z Glx Glutamine or glutamic acidamniocentesis Amniocentesis is the removal of
about two tablespoons of amniotic fluid via a needle
inserted through the maternal abdomen into the uterus
and amniotic sac. This is done to gain information
about the condition, and even the sex, of the fetus. The
fluid contains cells from the fetus and placenta.
Some women have a greater chance of giving birth
to a baby with a chromosome problem, and amniocentesis
can provide the answers if performed at about 16
weeks gestation (second trimester) or later. Chromosome
analysis and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) tests are two such
tests, and these check for chromosome abnormalities
such as Down’s syndrome and whether there are any
openings in the fetal skin, such as in the spine, that could
lead to neural-tube defects like spina bifida or anencephaly,
or inherited disorders such as cystic fibrosis.
While the procedure is relatively safe, some problems
that can occur are miscarriage (1 in 200, or 0.5
percent chance), cramping, and infections (less than 1
in 1,000).
Amniocentesis can also be performed during the
second and third trimesters to determine fetal lung
maturity, to verify the health of the fetus in cases of Rh
sensitivity, and to identify any infections.
First used in 1882 to remove excess amniotic fluid,
it is often used in late pregnancy to test for anemia in
fetuses with Rh disease and to check if the fetal lungs
are advanced enough for delivery to occur.
amnion The amnion is a thin, but tough, transparent
membranous sac and innermost of the four extra
embryonic membranes (allantois, yolk sac, chorion)
that encloses the embryo of reptiles, birds, and mammals.
These membranes hold the amniotic fluid and
form a protective layer for the fetus, insulating it from
bacteria and infection.
See also EMBRYO.
amniotes Any of the vertebrates such as reptiles,
birds, and mammals that have an amnion surrounding
the embryo.
amniotic egg A calcium based or leathery shelled
water-retaining egg that enables reptiles, birds, and
egg-laying mammals, such as the monotremes (duckbilled
platypus and two species of echidna, spiny
anteaters), to complete their life cycles on dry land.
amoebic dysentery Dysentery caused by a protozoan
parasite (Entamoeba histolytica), mostly caused
by poor sanitary conditions and transmitted by contaminated
food or water.
amphibian Cold-blooded, or ectothermic, vertebrates
in the class Amphibia. These include the frogs
and toads (order Anura, or Salientia), salamanders and
newts (order Urodela, or Caudata), and the caecilians,
limbless amphibians (order Apoda, or Gymnophiona).
There are more than 11,000 species of amphibians, and
they are believed to be the first vertebrate species to live
on land.
Located between the fish and reptiles on the evolutionary
scale, they are the most primitive of the terrestrial
vertebrates and undergo a metamorphosis from
water-breathing limbless larva (tadpole) to land-loving,
or partly terrestrial, air-breathing four-legged adult.
Eggs are typically deposited in water or a wet protected
place, although some do lay eggs in dry places.
The eggs are not shelled and do not possess the membranes
that are common in reptiles or higher vertebrates.
Adults have moist skins with no scales or small
scales, and they are specialized in living habitats. Each
has its own evolutionary adaptations from the jumping
ability (over 17 feet in some cases) of frogs and toads,
to the limbless caecilians, to the long tails of the salamanders
and newts. For example, frogs can enter aestivation,
a period of dormancy similar to hibernation,
when experiencing long periods of heat or drought
conditions, and they can breathe through their skin in a
process called cutaneous gas exchange. The most poisonous
frog known, Phyllobates terribilis, only needs
0.00000007 ounce of skin secretion to kill a predator,
while an antibiotic secreted from the African clawed
frog (Xenopus laevis) may someday be used to treat
burns and cystic fibrosis.
Over the last 50 years, many species of amphibians
around the world have declined markedly in numbers;
some species have become extinct. In many instances,
these declines are attributable to adverse human influences
acting locally, such as deforestation, draining of
wetlands, and pollution.
16 amniocentesisHowever, in 1988, herpetologists (scientists who
study amphibians) from many parts of the world
reported declines in amphibian populations in protected,
or pristine, habitats such as national parks and
nature reserves, where such local effects could not be
blamed. This suggested that there may be one or more
global factors that are affecting climatic and atmospheric
changes and adversely affecting amphibians,
such as increased UV-B radiation, widespread pollution,
acid rain, and disease. In effect, the decline could
be the result of human-induced changes to the global
ecosystem and could have far-reaching consequences
for human survival.
amphipathic molecule A molecule that has both a
hydrophilic (water soluble, polar) region and a
hydrophobic (water hating, nonpolar) region. The
hydrophilic part is called the head, while the hydrophobic
part is called the tail. Lipids (phospholipids, cholesterol
and other sterols, glycolipids [lipids with sugars
attached], and sphingolipids) are examples of amphipathic
molecules.
Amphipathic molecules act as surfactants, materials
that can reduce the surface tension of a liquid at
low concentrations, and are used in wetting agents,
demisters, foaming agents, and emulsifiers.
anabolism The processes of metabolism that result
in the synthesis of cellular components from precursors
of low molecular weight.
See also METABOLISM.
anaerobic Any organism or environmental or
cellular process that does not require the use of free
oxygen. Certain bacteria such as Actinomyces israeli,
Bacteroides fragilis, Prevotella melaninogenica,
Clostridium difficile, and Peptostreptococcus are
anaerobes.
In effect, an anaerobic organism does not need
oxygen for growth. Many anaerobes are even sensitive
to oxygen. Obligate (strict) anaerobes grow
only in the absence of oxygen. Facultative anaerobes
can grow either in the presence or in the absence of
oxygen.
See also AEROBIC.
anagenesis A pattern of evolutionary change along a
single, unbranching lineage involving the transformation
of an entire population, sometimes so different from the
ancestral population that it can be called a separate
species. Examples would be one taxon replacing another
or the transformation of a single ancestral species into a
single descendant species. Anagenesis is also known as
phyletic evolution and is the opposite of CLADOGENESIS.
In medicine, it refers to the regeneration of tissue
or structure.
analog A DRUG whose structure is related to that of
another drug but whose chemical and biological properties
may be quite different.
See also CONGENER.
analogy The similarity of structure between two
species that are not closely related; usually attributed to
convergent evolution. Structures that resemble each
other due to a similarity in function without any simianalogy
17
A photomicrograph of Clostridium botulinum, a strictly anaerobic
bacterium, stained with Gentian violet. The bacterium C. botulinum
produces a nerve toxin that causes the rare but serious paralytic
illness botulism. (Courtesy of Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)larity in underlying structure (or origin) are called analogous
structures. For example, birds and bats each
have their forelimbs modified as wings. They are analogous
because they evolved independently after the earliest
birds and bats diverged from their common
ancestor, who did not have wings. However, the details
of their structures are quite different.
anation Replacement of the LIGAND water by an
anion in a COORDINATION entity.
androgens Steroid sex hormones, such as testosterone
secreted by the testes in males, and others secreted
by the adrenal cortex in humans and higher animals,
as well as by the adrenal glands and ovaries in mammals.
Androgens stimulate the development and maintenance
of the male reproductive system such as sperm
production, sexual behavior, and muscle development.
Secondary sex characteristics such as the growth of
pubic hair in females is also a product of androgens, as
is the deepening of the voice at puberty.
Testosterone is present in a number of forms, such
as free testosterone, as testosterone bound to a protein,
sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), and as dihydrotestosterone.
Testosterone and synthetic androgens
(anabolic steroids) have been used for infertility, athletic
enhancement, erectile dysfunction, and libido problems,
but their use can cause side effects such as muscle weakness,
muscle atrophy, little facial and body hair, and even
changes in the size of the genitalia. Prolonged use can
damage the liver, and their use is banned in many sports.
Other androgens are androsterone (excreted in
urine), which reinforces masculine characteristics; dihydrotestosterone,
which is a metabolite synthesized
mainly in the liver from free testosterone by the enzyme
5-alpha-reductase and which levels are proportionally
correlated to sex drive as well as erectile capabilities;
and dehydroepiandrosterone, which are adrenal androgens
that have been linked to puberty and aging.
See also HORMONE.
androgynous Term applied to flowering plants that
have both staminate and pistillate flowers, or to cryptograms
(ferns, mosses, fungi, algae) where the
antheridia and archegonia are together.
anemia Condition in which there is a reduction in
the number of red blood cells or amount of
HEMOGLOBIN per unit volume of blood below the reference
interval for a similar individual of the species
under consideration, often causing pallor and fatigue.
See also HEMOGLOBIN.
aneuploidy Aneuploidy is the gain or loss of individual
chromosomes from the normal diploid set of 46
and is the most common cytogenetic abnormality
caused when homologous chromosomes fail to separate
during the first division of meiosis.
When a loss of a chromosome occurs, it is called
monosomy and is rarely seen in live births, since most
monosomic embryos and fetuses are lost to spontaneous
abortion at very early stages of pregnancy. One
exception to this is the loss of an X chromosome,
which produces Turner syndrome in about one out of
every 5,000 female births.
The more common gain of a single chromosome is
called trisomy and has been associated with various
cancers. A common autosomal trisomy is Down’s syndrome
in humans.
Another form of aneuploidy is called nullisomy,
which is the loss of both pairs of homologous chromosomes
and is almost always fatal to humans, since
humans have no extra disposable chromosomes in the
genome.
Tetrasomy is the gain of an extra pair of homologous
chromosomes and is a rare chromosomal aberration.
It can cause metopic craniosynostosis, facial
anomalies, cranial asymmetry, atrioseptal defects,
hydronephrosis, flexion contractures of the lower limbs,
sensorineural hearing loss, and mental retardation.
angiosperm A flowering plant. There are close to
250,000 species of flowering plants, second in abundance
only to insects. All have three basic organs
(roots, stems, and leaves) and represent the most abundant
and advanced terrestrial plants, which include
trees, herbaceous plants, herbs, shrubs, all grasses, and
some aquatic plants. Angiosperms are the source of
most of the food on which human beings and other
mammals rely and of many raw materials and natural
products that provide the infrastructure for modern
civilizations.
18 anationAngiosperms are divided into two large groups.
The dicotyledonea, or dicotyledons (also called magnoliopsida),
the larger of the two groups, includes trees
and shrubs and herbaceous plants. Dicots have two
seed leaves (cotyledons) in the embryo. The smaller of
the two groups is the monocotyledoneae, or monocotyledons
(also called liliopsida), that include rice,
corn, palms, bananas, coconuts, grasses, lilies, orchids,
and garden plants. Monocots have a single seed leaf in
the embryo.
The life cycles of the angiosperms have several
advantages over those of conifers, or gymnosperms,
the only other group of seed-bearing plants, and from
which scientists believe the angiosperms evolved
during the Cretaceous era some 145 million years
ago. They reproduce via flowers instead of cones;
their ovules are embedded in female sporophylls
instead of being exposed on a bare ground surface
(e.g., apple); the gametophyte is reduced; and seeds
are enclosed in fruits that develop from the ovary or
related structures.
Angiosperms have a true flower that is either a
highly modified shoot with modified stem and leaves or
a condensed and reduced compound strobilus (conelike
structure) or inflorescence (flower cluster). Floral parts
are in the form of sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels,
while the ovules—the structure that develops in the
plant ovary and contains the female gametophyte—are
contained within the megasporophylls that are sealed
in most angiosperm families. Pollination is facilitated
by wind, water, or many animals. Self-pollination as
well as parthenogenesis, a process by which embryonic
development is initiated directly from an unfertilized
cell, are common. Double fertilization occurs in all
members of the phylum to produce the unusual stored
food tissue called endosperm. Sexual reproduction
in flowering plants occurs by this process of double
fertilization in which one fertilization event forms an
angiosperm 19
An example of aneuploidy for an individual possessing three copies of a particular chromosome instead of the normal two copies.
(Courtesy of Darryl Leja, NHGRI, National Institutes of Health)embryo, and a second fertilization event produces
endosperm, a polyploid embryo-nourishing tissue
found only in the angiosperms. Seeds are dispersed
through a variety of forms such as fruits, follicles, capsules,
berries, drupes, samaras, nuts, and achenes.
Angiosperm is a combination of the Latin word angi-
(enclosed) and the Greek word sperma (seed).
anion An atom or molecule that has a negative
charge; a negatively charged ion.
See also ION.
anisotropy The property of molecules and materials
to exhibit variations in physical properties along different
molecular axes of the substance.
annual A plant that completes its entire life cycle—
germinates, grows, flowers, and seeds—in a single year
or growing season.
See also BIENNIAL; PERENNIAL.
antagonist A DRUG or a compound that opposes
the physiological effects of another. At the RECEPTOR
level, it is a chemical entity that opposes the RECEPTORassociated
responses normally induced by another
bioactive agent.
anterior Referring to the head end of a bilaterally
symmetrical animal; the front of an animal.
anther In angiosperms, it is the terminal pollen sac of
the stamen. The pollen grains with male gametes form
inside the anther. It is the pollen that fertilizes the
ovules. The anther is the primary male reproductive
structure at the apex of the flower’s stamen, the male
sexual organ.
See also STAMEN.
antheridium The multicellular male sex organ or
gametangium where motile male gametes (sperm) are
formed and protected in algae, fungi, bryophytes
(mosses, liverworts, etc.), and pteridophytes (ferns).
anthrax Bacterial disease of animals and humans
caused by contamination with spores from Bacillus
anthracis through inhalation or skin entry (cutaneous);
can be used as an agent of bioterrorism.
See also BACTERIA.
anti In the representation of STEREOCHEMICAL relationships,
anti means “on opposite sides” of a reference
plane, in contrast to syn, which means “on the
same side.”
antibiotic A chemical agent that is produced synthetically
or by an organism that is harmful to another
organism. It is used to combat disease, either topically
or by ingestion, in humans, animals, and plants. It can
be made from a mold or bacterium and kills or slows
the growth of other microbes, in particular bacteria.
Penicillin, one of the most famous antibiotics, was accidentally
discovered by the British bacteriologist SIR
ALEXANDER FLEMING in 1928.
Antibiotic resistance can occur when antibiotics are
used repetitively. While most of the targeted bacteria
are killed by a dose of antibiotics, some escape death,
and these remaining bacteria have or develop a genetic
resistance to the antibiotic. Unfortunately, this resistance
trait can be passed on to their offspring.
See also DRUG.
antibody A soluble immunoglobulin blood protein
produced by the B cells, white blood cells, that develop
20 anion
stigma
style
ovary
ovule
receptacle
petal
anther
filament
sepal
pedicel
A schematic of a typical angiosperm flower.in the bone marrow (also known as B lymphocytes,
plasma cells) in response to an antigen (a foreign substance).
Antibodies are produced in response to disease
and help the body fight against a particular disease by
binding to the antigen and killing it, or making it more
vulnerable to action by white blood cells. They help the
body develop an immunity to diseases.
Each antibody has two light (L) and two heavy (H)
immunoglobulin polypeptide chains linked together by
disulfide bonds, with two antigen-binding sites. There
are more than 1,000 possible variations, yet each antibody
recognizes only one specific antigen. Antibodies
are normally bound to a B cell, but when an antibody
encounters an antigen, the B cell produces copies of the
antibody with the assistance of helper T cells (a lymphocyte
that undergoes a developmental stage in the
thymus). The released antibodies then go after and
bind to the antigen, either killing it or marking it for
destruction by phagocytes.
There are five immunoglobulins: IgC, IgA, IgM,
IgD, and IgE.
IgA, or immunoglobulin A, comprises about 10–15
percent of the body’s total immunoglobulins and is
found in external secretions such as saliva, tears, breast
milk, and mucous, both intestinal and bronchial. They
are secreted on the surface of the body as a first defense
against bacteria and viral antigens in an attempt to prevent
them from entering the body.
IgM or immunoglobulin M antibodies are produced
in response to new or repeat infections and stay
in the body for a short time after infection. They make
up from 5 to 10 percent of the total immunoglobulins
and are the first to show up in the serum after an antigen
enters. IgM is produced during the primary
immune response. It is the IgMs that capture and bind
antigens to form large insoluble complexes that are
cleared from the blood.
IgG or immunoglobulin G (gamma globulin) antibodies
remain in the body for long periods of time after
infection and are the most common type, comprising
about 80 percent of the body’s total immunoglobulins.
They are in the serum and are produced in substantial
quantities during the secondary immune response, and
along with IgM activate the complement system, which
results in the destruction of the membrane of
pathogens. The IgGs act by agglutinating, by opsonising,
by activating complement-mediated reactions
against cellular pathogens, and by neutralizing toxins.
IgE or immunoglobulin E is associated with mast
cells, which are basophils, a type of granular white
blood cell that has left the bloodstream and entered a
tissue. Mast cells release histamine and heparin, chemicals
that mediate allergic reactions. Not surprisingly,
IgE is responsible for immediate hypersensitivity (allergic)
reactions and immune defense against parasites.
IgD or immunoglobulin D is a specialized immunoglobulin,
but its function is currently unknown. It is
found in small amounts in the serum.
antibody 21
antigens
antigen
antigen binding fragment
antibody
An antibody is a blood protein that is produced in response to and
that counteracts an antigen. Antibodies are produced in response
to disease and help the body fight against particular diseases. In
this way, antibodies help the body develop an immunity to disease.
(Courtesy of Darryl Leja, NHGRI, National Institutes of Health)anticodon A specialized sequence of three nucleotides
on a tRNA (transfer ribonucleic acid) molecule. The
anticodon associates with a complementary triplet of
bases—the codon—on an mRNA (messenger RNA)
molecule during protein synthesis.
The tRNA molecule acts like a “ferry” whose job
is to “pick up a passenger” (read the code from the
mRNA) and then “shuttle it” (dock to the corresponding
amino acid) into place. The other end of the tRNA
molecule has an acceptor site where the tRNA’s specific
amino acid will bind.
The 20 amino acids in the table below can create
64 different tRNA molecules, 61 for tRNA coding
and three codes for chain termination (pairing up with
“stop codons” that end the mRNA message), and
each amino acid can create more than one set of
codons.
See also CODON.
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) Also known as vasopressin,
ADH is a nine–amino acid peptide secreted from
the posterior pituitary gland. The hormone is packaged
in secretory vesicles with a carrier protein called neurophysin
within hypothalamic neurons, and both are
released upon hormone secretion. The single most important
effect of antidiuretic hormone is to conserve body
water by reducing the output of urine. It binds to receptors
in the distal or collecting tubules of the kidney and
promotes reabsorption of water back into the circulation.
The release of ADH is based on plasma osmolarity,
the concentration of solutes in the blood. For example,
loss of water (e.g., sweating) results in a concentration
of blood solutes, so plasma osmolarity increases.
Osmoreceptors, neurons in the hypothalamus, stimulate
secretion from the neurons that produce ADH. If
the plasma osmolarity falls below a certain threshold,
the osmoreceptors do nothing and no ADH is released.
However, when osmolarity increases above the threshold,
the osmoreceptors stimulate the neurons and ADH
is released.
antiferromagnetic See FERROMAGNETIC.
antigen A foreign substance, a macromolecule, that
is not indigenous to the host organism and therefore
elicits an immune response.
antimetabolite A structural ANALOG of an intermediate
(substrate or COENZYME) in a physiologically
occurring metabolic pathway that acts by replacing the
natural substrate, thus blocking or diverting the
biosynthesis of physiologically important substances.
antisense molecule An OLIGONUCLEOTIDE or ANALOG
thereof that is complementary to a segment of RNA
(ribonucleic acid) or DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
and that binds to it and inhibits its normal function.
aphotic zone The deeper part of the ocean beneath
the photic zone, where light does not penetrate sufficiently
for photosynthesis to occur.
See also OCEANIC ZONE.
22 anticodon
Amino Acid:
A = Adeninez
C = Cytosine
G = Guanine
U = Uracil
Alanine GCC, GCA, GCG, GCU
Arginine AGA, AGG, CGU, CGA, CGC, CGG
Asparagine AAC, AAU
Aspartic Acid GAC, GAU
Cysteine UGC, UGU
Glutamic Acid GAA, GAG
Glutamine CAA, CAG
Glycine GGA, GGC, GGG, GGU
Histidine CAC, CAU
Isoleucine AUA, AUC, AUU
Leucine UUA, UUG, CUA, CUC, CUG, CUU
Lycine AAA, AAG
Methionine (initiation) AUG
Phenylalanine UUC, UUU
Proline CCA, CCC, CCG, CCU
Serine UCA, UCC, UCG, UCU, AGC, AGU
Threonine ACA, ACC, ACG, ACU
Tryptophan UGG
Tyrosine UAC, UAU
Valine GUA, GUC, GUG, GUU
“Stop” UAA, UAG, UGAapical dominance Concentration of growth at the
tip of a plant shoot, where a terminal bud partially
inhibits axillary bud growth. It is thought to be caused
by the apical bud producing a great deal of IAA (auxin),
which is transported from the apical bud to the surrounding
area and causes lateral buds to stay dormant.
apical meristem Embryonic plant tissue (meristematic
cells) in the tips of roots and in the buds of shoots
that supplies cells via mitosis for the plant to grow in
length.
apomixis The ability of certain plants to reproduce
clones of themselves, i.e., the scaly male fern group,
Dryopteris affinis (Lowe) Fraser-Jenkins.
apomorphic character A phenotypic character, or
homology, in which the similarity of characters found
in different species is the result of common descent,
i.e., the species evolved after a branch diverged from a
phylogenetic tree.
Two characters in two taxa are homologues if they
are the same as the character that is found in the ancestry
of the two taxa or they are different characters that
have an ancestor/descendant relationship described as
preexisting or novel. The ancestral character is termed
the plesiomorphic character, and the descendant character
is termed the apomorphic character. Examples are
the flippers of whales and human arms.
See also PHENOTYPE.
apoplast The cell-wall continuum of an organ or a
plant; in a plant it includes the xylem. The movement
of substances via cell walls is called apoplastic transport.
apoprotein A protein without its characteristic PROSTHETIC
GROUP or metal.
apoptosis Cells die by injury or commit “suicide.”
Apoptosis is a programmed cell death (PCD) brought
about by signals that trigger the activation of a flood
apoptosis 23
RNA polymerase
T
T G
G
C
C
C
C G
A
A
A
A A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
T T
T
T
T
T
T
T
C
A C
C C
C
C G
G
G G
G G
G
G
A U U C C C C C
C
A U C
G C
G G
T
A
C
G
C
U
sense strand
(coding strand)
RNA
DNA
antisense strand
(non-coding DNA)
An antisense molecule is the noncoding strand in double-stranded DNA. The antisense strand serves as the template for mRNA
synthesis. (Courtesy of Darryl Leja, NHGRI, National Institutes of Health)of “suicide” proteins in the cells destined to die. The
destined cells then go through a number of molecular
and morphological changes until they finally die. PCD
is important in proper development in mitosis and cells
that may be threatening to the host organism. It can be
induced by a variety of stimuli, such as ligation of cell
surface receptors, starvation, growth factor/survival
factor deprivation, heat shock, hypoxia, DNA damage,
viral infection, and cytotoxic/chemotherapeutical
agents. Apoptosis is a word of Greek origin meaning
“falling off or dropping off.” There is a Web site
devoted to the topic at http://www.celldeath.de/mainfram.
htm.
aposematic coloration The bright coloration of animals
with effective physical or chemical defenses that
24 aposematic coloration
Scanning Electron Micrograph (SEM) of human white blood cells (leucocytes) showing one cell undergoing apoptosis. Apoptosis is
the process of “genetically programmed cell death.” At upper right, an apoptotic white blood cell has shrunk and its cytoplasm has
developed blebs (grapelike clusters). Normal white blood cells are seen beside it. These white blood cells are myeloid leucocytes,
originating from bone marrow. The human myeloid cell line depends on growth factors to survive, and cells undergo apoptosis when
deprived of growth factors. Research on apoptosis may provide genetic treatments for diseases such as cancer. Magnification: ×7,500
at 8×10-in. size. (Courtesy © Dr. Gopal Murti/Photo Researchers, Inc.)
A New York tiger moth (Grammia virginiensis) exuding a toxic
yellow froth from prothoracic glands. This is an example of lepidoptera
showing chemical defense and aposematic coloration.
(Courtesy of Tim McCabe)acts as a warning to experienced predators. The larvae
of the monarch butterfly and Phymateus morbillosus, a
foaming grasshopper from South Africa, are two examples.
The warning coloration alerts the predator, who
may have eaten a similar-looking animal and was sickened
by it, to avoid it. This also helps those species that
mimic others in appearance, such as the viceroy butterfly
and the monarch butterfly.
See also MIMICRY.
aquaporins (AQPs) The aquaporins are a family of
proteins known for facilitating water transport. An
aquaporin is a transport protein in the plasma membranes
of a plant or animal cell that specifically facilitates
the diffusion of water across the membrane
(osmosis).
Aquaporin-1, or CHIP-28, discovered in 1992 by
Peter Agre, is the major water channel of the red blood
cells. In the kidneys, it is involved in the reabsorption of
most of the waste filtered through the glomeruli. It is
also thought to influence the movement of CO2 across
the cell membrane, since it is present in most cells that
have high levels of CO2. Aquaporin-2, or WCH-CD, is a
water channel that makes the principal cells of the
medullary collecting duct in the kidneys more permeable
to water. Lack of a functional aquaporin-2 gene leads to
a rare form of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. There are
many more aquaporins that have been discovered in the
more water-permeable parts of the body, such as the
moist surface tissues of the alveoli in the lung, the kidney
tubules, the choroid plexus of the brain where cerebrospinal
fluid is produced, the ciliary epithelium of the
eye where aqueous humor is formed, and the salivary
and lacrimal tear glands. Aquaporins are believed to be
involved in mechanisms defending against brain edema,
congestive heart failure, and many other clinical entities.
aquation The incorporation of one or more integral
molecules of water into another chemical species with or
without displacement of one or more atoms or groups.
See also HYDRATION.
aqueous solution A solution in which water is the
solvent or dissolving medium, such as salt water, rain,
or soda.
Archaea One of two prokaryotic (no nucleus)
domains, the other being the Bacteria. Archaeans
include organisms that live in some of the most
extreme environments on the planet and resemble
bacteria. They are single-cell organisms that, with
bacteria, are called prokaryotes. Their DNA is not
enclosed in a nucleus. Bacteria and archaea are the
only prokaryotes; all other life forms are eukaryotes.
Archaeans are among the earliest forms of life that
appeared on Earth billions of years ago, and it is
believed that the archaea and bacteria developed
separately from a common ancestor nearly 4 billion
years ago.
Some archaeans are “extremophiles,” that is,
they live near rift vents in the deep sea at temperatures
well over 100°C (212°F). Others live in hot
springs (such as the hot springs of Yellowstone
National Park, where some of archaea were first discovered)
or in extremely alkaline or acid waters.
They have been found inside the digestive tracts of
cows, termites, and marine life, where they produce
methane. They also live in the anoxic muds of marshes
and at the bottom of the ocean and in petroleum
deposits deep underground. They are also quite abundant
in the plankton of the open sea and even have
been found in the Antarctic. They survive in these
harsh conditions by using a variety of protective
molecules and enzymes.
Three groups of archaeans are known and include
the Crenarchaeota, those that are extremophiles; the
Euryarchaeota, methane producers and salt lovers; and
the Korarchaeota, an all-inclusive group that contains a
number of types that are little understood today.
Archaeans produce energy by feeding on hydrogen
gas, carbon dioxide, and sulfur and can even create
energy from the sun by using a pigment around the
membrane called a bacteriorhodopsin that reacts with
light and produces ATP.
The archaeans were not discovered as a separate
group until the late 1970s.
archaezoa This group is believed to be the first to
diverge from the prokaryotes. They lack mitochondria
(converts foods into usable energy), though some
archaezoans have genes for mitochondrial. They also
lack an endoplasmic reticulum (important for protein
synthesis) and golgi apparatus (important for glycosyarchaezoa
25lation, secretion), have no peroxisomes (use oxygen to
carry out catabolic reactions), and have small ribosomes
similar to bacteria.
Archaezoa has three known subgroups: diplomonads,
microspoidians, and trichomonads. They are usually
found with flagellas in moist/damp environments
such as streams, lakes, underground water deposits,
and in damp soil.
Some members have been found in harsh environments
and can exist in bodies of water that can drop
below –20° Fahrenheit and around ocean floor vents
that exceed 320°F. These organisms can survive in a
variety of environments as long as they are in water.
Many archaezoans are parasites and feed off their
host. The species Giardia, which causes abdominal
cramps and severe diarrhea, uses a ventral suction cup
to attach to the human intestinal epithelium. Some
species have chloroplasts that allow them to take in
light energy and use it when needed. Some species contain
hydrogenosomes, organelles that are similar to
mitochondria but do not respire with oxygen. They
convert pyruvate into acetate, CO2, and H2, allowing
extra ATP synthesis without respiration.
Since they have no mitochondria or plastid, it is
believed that they are the intermediate stage between
prokaryotes and eukaryotes and are also used as evidence
for the evolution of the nucleus before the
organelles.
archegonium In plants, the multicellular flaskshaped
female gametangium (a moist chamber in which
gametes develop in bryophytes, ferns, and gymnosperms).
archenteron The endoderm-lined gut (enteron) hollow
cavity formed during the gastrulation process in
metazoan embryos. The archenteron is formed by the
infolding of part of the outer surface of the BLASTULA
and opening to the exterior via the BLASTOPORE. Also
called the primitive gut, or gastrocoel in early embryonic
development, it is the digestive cavity. The term is
Greek for “primitive intestine.”
archipelago A group or chain of islands clustered in
a body of water, e.g., the African Bazaruto Archipelago,
consisting of five islands: Bazaruto, Magaruque,
Santa Carolina, Benguera (Benguerra), and Bangue.
Aristotle (384 B.C.E.–322 B.C.E.) Greek Philosopher
Aristotle, a Greek philosopher and scientist, has
had more influence on the field of science than anyone.
His influence, which lasted more than 2,000
years, was due to the fact that he was the first to
depart from the old Platonic school of thinking by
reasoning that accurate observation, description,
inductive reasoning, and interpretation was the way
to understand the natural world. Since he was the
first to use this method, he is often called the “Father
of Natural History.”
Born in 384 B.C.E. in the Ionian colony of Stagirus
(now Macedonia), Aristotle was the son of Nicomachus,
a physician and grandfather of Alexander the
Great. At 17, he became a student in Plato’s academy
in Athens and stayed there for more than 20 years as a
student and teacher. In 347 B.C.E., he moved to the
princedom of Atarneus in Mysia (northwestern Asia
Minor), ruled by Hermias, and who presided over a
small circle of Plato followers in the town of Assos.
Aristotle befriended Hermias, joined the group, and
eventually married Hermias’s niece and adopted daughter
Pythias.
Around 342 B.C.E., he moved to Mieza, near the
Macedonian capital Pella, to supervise the education
of 13-year-old Alexander the Great. Aristotle returned
to Athens in 335 B.C.E. to teach, promote research
projects, and organize a library in the Lyceum. His
school was known as the Peripatetic School. After
Alexander’s death in 323 B.C.E., Aristotle was prosecuted
and had to leave Athens, leaving his school to
Theophrastus. He died shortly after at Chalcis in
Euboea in 322 B.C.E.
While his writings were immense, one of his works
particularly influenced the field of meteorology for
over 2,000 years. Meteorologica (meteorology) was
written in 350 B.C.E. and comprised four books,
although there are doubts about the authenticity of the
last one. They deal mainly with atmospheric phenomena,
oceans, meteors and comets, and the fields of
astronomy, chemistry, and geography.
Aristotle attempted to explain the atmosphere
in a philosophical way and discussed all forms of
“meteors,” a term then used to explain anything sus-
26 archegoniumpended in the atmosphere. Aristotle discussed the
philosophical nature of clouds and mist, snow, rain
and hail, wind, lightning and thunder, rivers, rainbows,
and climatic changes. His ideas posited the
existence of four elements (earth, wind, fire, and
water), each arranged in separate layers but capable
of mingling.
Aristotle’s observations in the biological sciences
had some validity, but many of his observations and
conclusions regarding weather and climate were
wrong, and it was not until the 17th century—with the
invention of meteorological instruments such as the
hygrometer, thermometer, and barometer—that his
ideas were disproved scientifically. However, he correctly
reasoned that the earth was a sphere, recorded
information regarding the bathymetry of seas, correctly
interpreted dolphins and whales as mammals, separated
vertebrates into oviparous and viviparous, and
described and named many organisms, including crustaceans
and worms, mollusks, echinoderms, and fish
from the Aegean Sea.
Arrhenius, Svante August (1859–1927) Swedish
Chemist, Physicist Svante August Arrhenius was born
in Vik (or Wijk), near Uppsala, Sweden, on February
19, 1859. He was the second son of Svante Gustav
Arrhenius and Carolina Christina (née Thunberg).
Svante’s father was a surveyor and an administrator of
his family’s estate at Vik. In 1860, a year after Arrhenius
was born, his family moved to Uppsala, where his
father became a supervisor at the university. He was
reading by the age of three.
Arrhenius received his early education at the
cathedral school in Uppsala, excelling in biology,
physics, and mathematics. In 1876, he entered the
University of Uppsala and studied physics, chemistry,
and mathematics, receiving his B.S. two years later.
While he continued graduate classes for three years in
physics at Uppsala, his studies were not completed
there. Instead, Arrhenius transferred to the Swedish
Academy of Sciences in Stockholm in 1881 to work
under Erick Edlund to conduct research in the field of
electrical theory.
Arrhenius studied electrical conductivity of dilute
solutions by passing electric current through a variety
of solutions. His research determined that molecules
in some of the substances split apart, or dissociated
from each other, into two or more ions when they
were dissolved in a liquid. He found that while each
intact molecule was electrically balanced, the split
particles carried a small positive or negative electrical
charge when dissolved in water. The charged atoms
permitted the passage of electricity, and the electrical
current directed the active components toward the
electrodes. His thesis on the theory of ionic dissociation
was barely accepted by the University of Uppsala
in 1884, since the faculty believed that oppositely
charged particles could not coexist in solution. He
received a grade that prohibited him from being able
to teach.
Arrhenius published his theories (“Investigations
on the Galvanic Conductivity of Electrolytes”) and
sent copies of his thesis to a number of leading European
scientists. Russian-German chemist Wilhelm Ostwald,
one of the leading European scientists of the day
and one of the principal founders of physical chemistry,
was impressed and visited him in Uppsala, offering
him a teaching position, which he declined.
However, Ostwald’s support was enough for Uppsala
to give him a lecturing position, which he kept for two
years.
The Stockholm Academy of Sciences awarded
Arrhenius a traveling scholarship in 1886. As a result,
he worked with Ostwald in Riga with physicist
Friedrich Kohlrausch at the University of Wurzburg,
with physicist Ludwig Boltzmann at the University of
Graz, and with chemist Jacobus Van’t Hoff at the University
of Amsterdam. In 1889, he formulated his rate
equation that is used for many chemical transformations
and processes, in which the rate is exponentially
related to temperature, known as the “Arrhenius
equation.”
He returned to Stockholm in 1891 and became a
lecturer in physics at Stockholm’s Hogskola (high
school) and was appointed physics professor in 1895
and rector in 1897. Arrhenius married Sofia Rudbeck
in 1894 and had one son. The marriage lasted a short
two years. Arrhenius continued his work on electrolytic
dissociation and added the study of osmotic
pressure.
In 1896, he made the first quantitative link
between changes in carbon dioxide concentration and
climate. He calculated the absorption coefficients of
carbon dioxide and water based on the emission spectrum
of the moon, and he also calculated the amount
Arrhenius, Svante August 27of total heat absorption and corresponding temperature
change in the atmosphere for various concentrations
of carbon dioxide. His prediction of a doubling of
carbon dioxide from a temperate rise of 5–6°C is close
to modern predictions. He predicted that increasing
reliance on fossil fuel combustion to drive the world’s
increasing industrialization would, in the end, lead to
increases in the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere,
thereby giving rise to a warming of the Earth.
In 1900, he published his Textbook of Theoretical
Electrochemistry. In 1901 he and others confirmed the
Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell’s hypothesis that
cosmic radiation exerts pressure on particles. Arrhenius
went on to use this phenomenon in an effort to explain
the aurora borealis and solar corona. He supported the
Norwegian physicist Kristian Birkeland’s explanation of
the origin of auroras that he proposed in 1896. He also
suggested that radiation pressure could carry spores and
other living seeds through space and believed that life on
earth was brought here under those conditions. He likewise
believed that spores might have populated many
other planets, resulting in life throughout the universe.
In 1902, he received the Davy Medal of the Royal
Society and proposed a theory of immunology. The following
year he was awarded the Nobel Prize for chemistry
for his work that originally had been perceived as
improbable by his Uppsala professors. He also published
his Textbook of Cosmic Physics.
He became director of the Nobel Institute of Physical
Chemistry in Stockholm in 1905 (a post he held
until a few months before his death). He married
Maria Johansson and had one son and two daughters.
The following year he also had time to publish three
books, Theories of Chemistry, Immunochemistry, and
Worlds in the Making.
He was elected a foreign member of the Royal
Society in 1911, the same year he received the Willard
Gibbs Medal of the American Chemical Society. Three
years later he was awarded the Faraday Medal of the
British Chemical Society. He was also a member of the
Swedish Academy of Sciences and the German Chemical
Society.
During the latter part of his life his interests included
the chemistry of living matter and astrophysics, especially
the origins and fate of stars and planets. He
continued to write books such as Smallpox and Its Combating
(1913), Destiny of the Stars (1915), Quantitative
Laws in Biological Chemistry (1915), and Chemistry
and Modern Life (1919). He also received honorary
degrees from the universities of Birmingham, Edinburgh,
Heidelberg, and Leipzig and from Oxford and Cambridge
Universities. He died in Stockholm on October 2,
1927, after a brief illness, and is buried at Uppsala.
arteriosclerosis Also known as “hardening of the
arteries.” It is a disease whereby the arteries thicken and
the inner surfaces accumulate deposits of hard plaques
of cholesterol, calcium, fibrin, and other cellular debris.
The arteries become inelastic and narrowed, which
increases the stress on the heart as it pumps blood
through, and complete obstruction with loss of blood
supply can occur. This is a common cause for high
blood pressure. There are hereditary links that are associated
with increased risk of heart attack and stroke.
When arteriosclerosis occurs in large arteries, such as
the aorta, it is often referred to as atherosclerosis.
See also ARTERY.
artery A blood vessel that carries oxygenated
(except the pulmonary artery) blood away from the
heart via the right and left ventricles to organs
throughout the body. The main trunk of the arterial
system in the body is called the aorta. The aortic divisions
are the abdominal aorta, thoracic aorta, aortic
artery, and ascending aorta. The pulmonary artery
carries unoxygenated blood from the heart to the
lungs for oxygenation.
See also VEIN.
arthritis Inflammation of one or more of the joints in
the body.
Arthropoda An animal phylum where individuals
have a segmented body, exoskeleton, and jointed legs.
artificial selection Artificial selection is the conscious
attempt by human beings to alter the environments
or traits of other organisms (including their own
environment) so as to alter the evolution of these
28 arteriosclerosisorganism’s species. It is used in the selective breeding of
domesticated plants and animals to encourage the
occurrence of desirable traits or new breeds. Chickens
are artificially selected to produce better eggs, and pet
fish are selectively bred to produce vibrant colors and
other desirable traits.
ascus (plural, asci) In Ascomycota (blue, green, and
red molds), a saclike spore capsule located at the tip of
the fruiting body, called the ascocarp in dikaryotic
(containing two differing haploid nuclei) hyphae, in
which ascopores are found and in which karyogamy is
performed, i.e., two (dikaryotic) nuclei fuse (karyogamy)
to form diploid nuclei. Asci vary in shape from
narrow and elongate to nearly round. While the number
of ascospores per ascus is usually eight, numerous
other counts of ascospores per ascus are also known.
In medicine ASCUS stands for atypical squamous
cells of undetermined significance and means that irregular
cells have shown up on a Pap smear.
asexual reproduction A type of reproduction, without
meiosis or syngamy (the fusion of two gametes in
fertilization), involving only one parent that produces
genetically identical offspring by budding, by the division
of a single cell, or by the entire organism breaking
into two or more parts. The offspring has the identical
genes and chromosomes as the parent. Most plants are
capable of asexual reproduction by means of specialized
organs called propagules, such as tubers, stolons,
gemma cups, and rhizomes.
Asexual reproduction is also known as vegetative
reproduction. Examples of organisms that reproduce
by asexual reproduction include aspens, dandelions,
strawberries, walking fern (Asplenium rhizophyllum),
and yeast. While asexual reproduction guarantees
reproduction (no dependence on others), it does not
allow genetic variation.
See also SEXUAL REPRODUCTION.
asexual reproduction 29
Illustration of the arterial system in the human body, shown in a
standing figure. The heart and kidneys are also shown. Note the
feathery network of blood vessels in the left and right lungs (next
to the heart). Arteries are the blood vessels that carry oxygen-rich
blood to the body’s tissues. Veins (not shown) carry blood back to
the heart. The average adult has about five liters of blood. At rest,
this volume of blood passes through the heart each minute.
(Courtesy © John Bavosi/Photo Researchers, Inc.)
A tailless whip scorpion (arthropod) from a cave in the Bahamas
is an example of a troglodyte, an animal that lives underground.
(Courtesy of Tim McCabe)assimilation To transform food and other nutrients
into a part of the living organism.
assimilative See ASSIMILATION.
assimilator See ASSIMILATION.
associative learning The acquired ability to associate
one stimulus with another, such as one linked to a
reward or punishment; also called classical conditioning
and trial-and-error learning.
assortative mating A type of nonrandom or preference
mating in which mating partners resemble each
other in certain phenotypic characteristics. It can be a
preference or avoidance of certain individuals as mates
based on physical or social traits.
astigmatism Distorted vision, especially at close distances,
resulting from an irregularly shaped cornea.
asymmetric carbon A carbon atom covalently
bonded to four different atoms or groups of atoms.
asymmetric synthesis A traditional term for stereoselective
synthesis. A chemical reaction or reaction
sequence in which one or more new elements of CHIRALITY
are formed in a SUBSTRATE molecule and which
produces the STEREOISOMERic (ENANTIOMERic or
DIASTEREOISOMERic) products in unequal amounts.
asymmetry parameter In nuclear quadrupole resonance
spectroscopy, the parameter, h, is used for
describing nonsymmetric fields. It is defined as h =
(qxx – qyy)/qzz in which qxx, qyy, and qzz are the
components of the field gradient q (which is the second
derivative of the time-averaged electric potential) along
the x– , y– and z–axes. By convention qzz refers to the
largest field gradient, qyy to the next largest, and qxx
to the smallest when all three values are different.
atomic number The atomic number is equal to the
number of positively charged protons in an atom’s
nucleus and determines which element an atom is.
The atomic number is unique for each element and is
designated by a subscript to the left of the elemental
symbol. The atomic number for hydrogen is 1; it has
one proton. Elements are substances made up of
atoms with the same atomic number. Most of the
elements are metals (75 percent) and the others are
nonmetals.
atomic weight or mass The total atomic mass (the
weighted average of the naturally occurring isotopes),
which is the mass in grams of one MOLE of the atom.
The atomic weight is calculated by adding the number
of protons and neutrons together. The atomic weight of
hydrogen is 1.0079 grams per mole.
ATP (adenosine triphosphate) An adenine (purine
base), ribose, and three phosphate units containing
nucleoside triphosphate that (a) releases free energy
when its phosphate bonds are hydrolyzed and (b) produces
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic
phosphorous. This energy is used to drive ENDERGONIC
REACTIONS in cells (chemical reactions that
require energy input to begin). ATP is produced in the
cristae of mitochondria and chloroplasts in plants and
is the driving force in muscle contraction and protein
synthesis in animals. It is the major energy source
within cells.
ATP synthase (proton translocating ATPase) A
protein complex (a chemiosmotic enzyme) that synthesizes
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and enables phosphate
coupling with an electrochemical ion gradient across
the membrane. It is found in cellular membranes and
the inner membrane of mitochondria, the thylakoid
membrane of chloroplasts, and the plasma membrane
of prokaryotes. The protein consists of two
portions: a soluble fraction that contains three catalytic
sites and a membrane-bound portion that contains
anion channels. It functions in chemiosmosis,
the use of ion gradients across membranes, with
adjacent electron transport chains, and it uses the
30 assimilationenergy stored across the photosynthetic membrane (a
hydrogen-ion concentration gradient) to add inorganic
phosphate to ADP, thereby creating ATP. This
allows hydrogen ions (H+) to diffuse into the mitochondrion.
atrioventricular valve A valve in the heart between
each atrium and ventricle. It prevents a backflow of
blood when the ventricles contract.
atrium (plural, atria) An upper chamber that
receives blood from the veins returning to the vertebrate
heart and then pushes the blood to the ventricles,
the lower chambers. There is a left and right atrium.
Oxygenated blood returns from the lungs into the left
atrium and gets pushed down to the left ventricle. The
left ventricle pumps the blood out to the rest of the
body, transporting the oxygen to parts of the body that
need it. Blood returning from its voyage through the
body arrives in the right atrium. It then goes into the
right ventricle from which it goes through the lungs
again to get more oxygen, and the cycle continuously
repeats itself.
auranofin See GOLD DRUGS.
autacoid A biological substance secreted by various
cells whose physiological activity is restricted to the
vicinity of its release; it is often referred to as local
HORMONE.
autogenesis model According to autogenesis (“selfgenerating”),
eukaryotic cells evolved by the specialization
of internal membranes originally derived from
prokaryotic plasma membranes. This is another word
for spontaneous generation or abiogenesis.
autoimmune disease An immunological disorder in
which the immune system turns against itself. Autoimmunity
can be the cause of a broad spectrum of human
illnesses. Autoimmune diseases were not accepted into
the mainstream of medicine until the 1950s and 1960s.
They are diseases in which the progression from benign
autoimmunity to pathogenic autoimmunity happens
over a period of time and is determined by both genetic
influences and environmental triggers. Examples of
autoimmune diseases are idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura, Graves’ disease, myasthenia gravis, pemphigus
vulgaris (cause of pemphigus), and bullous pemphigoid
(a blistering disease).
autonomic nervous system (ANS) A division of the
nervous system of vertebrates. The nervous system consists
of two major subdivisions: the central nervous system
(CNS), made up of the brain and spinal cord, and
the peripheral nervous system (PNS), which comprises
ganglia and peripheral nerves outside the brain and the
spinal cord. The peripheral nervous system is divided
into two parts: the somatic, which is concerned with
sensory information about the environment outside the
body as well as muscle and limb position; and the autonomic
nervous system that regulates the internal environment
of vertebrates. It consists of the sympathetic
(fight/flight), parasympathetic (rest/rebuild), and enteric
nervous systems. The ANS is involved in the function
of virtually every organ system.
The parasympathetic nervous system takes care of
essential background operations such as heart/lungs
and digestion, while the sympathetic nervous system
provides stress-response and procreation strategies and
functions. The enteric nervous system takes care of
controlling the function of the gut.
The sympathetic nerves form part of the nerve network
connecting the organ systems with the central nervous
system. The sympathetic nerves permit an animal
to respond to stressful situations and helps control the
reaction of the body to stress. Examples of the sympathetic
reactions are increase in heart rate, decrease in
secretion of salivary and digestive glands, and dilation
of pupils. The parasympathetic nerves connect both
somatic and visceral organs to the central nervous system,
and their primary action is to keep body functions
normalized. The ANS works to conserve the body’s
resources and to restore equilibrium to the resting state.
autophytic The process whereby an organism uses
photosynthesis to make complex foods from inorganic
substances.
autophytic 31autopolyploid A type of polyploid species resulting
from one species doubling its chromosome number to
become tetraploid, which may self-fertilize or mate
with other tetraploids. This can result in sympatric speciation,
where a new species can evolve in the geographical
midst of its parent species because of
reproductive isolation.
See also POLYPLOIDY.
autoreceptor Present at a nerve ending, a RECEPTOR
that regulates, via positive or negative feedback processes,
the synthesis and/or release of its own physiological
ligand.
See also HETERORECEPTOR.
autosome A chromosome that is not directly
involved in determining sex, as opposed to the sex
chromosomes or the mitochondrial chromosome.
Human cells have 22 pairs of autosomes.
autotroph Any organism capable of making its
own food. It synthesizes its own organic food substances
from inorganic compounds using sources such
as carbon dioxide, ammonia, and nitrates. Most
plants and many protists and bacteria are autotrophs.
Photoautotrophs can use light energy to make their
food (photosynthesis). Chemoautotrophs use chemical
energy to make their food by oxidizing compounds
such as hydrogen sulfide (H2S). Heterotrophs are
organisms that must obtain their energy from organic
compounds.
See also TROPHIC LEVEL.
auxins A group of plant hormones that produce a
number of effects, including plant growth, phototropic
response through the stimulation of cell elongation
(photopropism), stimulation of secondary growth,
apical dominance, and the development of leaf traces
and fruit. An important plant auxin is indole-3-acetic
acid (IAA). (IAA and synthetic auxins such as 2,4-D
and 2,4,5-T are used as common weed killers.)
auxotroph A nutritionally mutant organism that is
unable to synthesize certain essential molecules (e.g.,
mineral salts and glucose) and that cannot grow on
media lacking these molecules normally synthesized by
wild-type strains of the same species without the addition
of a specific supplement like an amino acid.
Aves The vertebrate class of birds, characterized by
feathers and other flight adaptations, such as an active
metabolism, and distinguished by having the body
more or less completely covered with feathers and the
forelimbs modified as wings. Birds are a monophyletic
lineage that evolved once from a common ancestor, and
all birds are related through that common origin. There
are about 30 orders of birds, about 180 families, and
about 2,000 genera with 10,000 species.
axillary bud An embryonic shoot present in the
angle formed by a leaf and stem. Also called the lateral
bud.
axon A process from a neuron, usually covered with
a myelin sheath, that carries nerve impulses away from
the cell body and to the synapse in contact with a target
cell. The end of the axon contains vesicles (hollow
spheres), in which transmitters are stored, and specialized
structures forming the synapse.
See also NEURON.
azurin An ELECTRON TRANSFER PROTEIN, containing a
TYPE 1 COPPER site, that is isolated from certain bacteria.
32 autopolyploidbacteria One of two prokaryotic (no nucleus)
domains, the other being the ARCHAEA. Bacteria are
microscopic, simple, single-cell organisms. Some bacteria
are harmless and often beneficial, playing a major
role in the cycling of nutrients in ecosystems via aerobic
and anaerobic decomposition (saprophytic), while others
are pathogenic, causing disease and even death.
Some species form symbiotic relationships with other
organisms, such as legumes, and help them survive in
the environment by fixing atmospheric nitrogen. Many
different species exist as single cells or colonies, and
they fall into four shapes based on the shape of their
rigid cell wall: coccal (spherical), bacillary (rod-shaped),
spirochetal (spiral/helical or corkscrew), and vibro
(comma-shaped). Bacteria are also classified on the
basis of oxygen requirement (aerobic vs. anaerobic).
In the laboratory, bacteria are classified as grampositive
(blue) or gram-negative (pink) following a laboratory
procedure called a Gram’s stain. Gram-negative
bacteria, such as those that cause the plague, cholera,
typhoid fever, and salmonella, for example, have two
outer membranes, which make them more resistant to
conventional treatment. They can also easily mutate
and transfer these genetic changes to other strains,
making them more resistant to antibiotics. Gram-positive
bacteria, such as those that cause anthrax and listeriosis,
are more rare and are treatable with penicillin
but can cause severe damage by either releasing toxic
chemicals (e.g., clostridium botulinum) or by penetrating
deep into tissue (e.g., streptococci). Bacteria are
often called germs.
bacteriochlorin (7,8,17,18-tetrahydroporphyrin) A
reduced PORPHYRIN with two pairs of nonfused saturated
33
B
Photomicrograph of Streptococcus (Diplococcus) pneumoniae
bacteria, using Gram’s stain technique. Streptococcus pneumoniae
is one of the most common organisms causing respiratory
infections such as pneumonia and sinusitis, as well as bacteremia,
otitis media, meningitis, peritonitis, and arthritis. (Courtesy of
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1979)carbon atoms (C-7, C-8 and C-17, C-18) in two of the
pyrrole rings.
See also ISOBACTERIOCHLORIN.
bacteriochlorophyll See CHLOROPHYLL.
bacterium (plural, bacteria) A single-celled prokaryotic
microorganism in the bacteria domain.
See also BACTERIA.
balanced polymorphism The maintenance of two
or more alleles in a population due to the selective
advantage of the heterozygote. A heterozygote is a
genotype consisting of two different alleles of a gene
for a particular trait (Aa). Balanced polymorphism is a
type of polymorphism where the frequencies of the
coexisting forms do not change noticeably over many
generations. Polymorphism is a genetic trait controlled
by more than one allele, each of which has a frequency
of 1 percent or greater in the population gene pool.
Polymorphism can also be defined as two or more phenotypes
maintained in the same breeding population.
See also POLYMORPHISM.
Banting, Frederick Grant (1891–1941) Canadian
Physician Frederick Grant Banting was born on
November 14, 1891, at Alliston, Ontario, Canada, to
William Thompson Banting and Margaret Grant.
He went to secondary school at Alliston and then
to the University of Toronto to study divinity before
changing to the study of medicine. In 1916 he took his
M.B. degree and joined the Canadian Army Medical
Corps and served in France during World War I. In
1918 he was wounded at the battle of Cambrai, and
the following year he was awarded the Military Cross
for heroism under fire.
In 1922 he was awarded his M.D. degree and was
appointed senior demonstrator in medicine at the University
of Toronto. In 1923 he was elected to the Banting
and Best Chair of Medical Research, which had
been endowed by the legislature of the Province of
Ontario.
Also in 1922, while working at the University of
Toronto in the laboratory of the Scottish physiologist
John James Richard MACLEOD, and with the assistance
of the Canadian physiologist Charles Best, Banting discovered
insulin after extracting it from the pancreas.
The following year he received the Nobel Prize in
medicine along with Macleod. Angered that Macleod,
rather than Best, had received the Nobel Prize, Banting
divided his share of the award equally with Best. It was
Canada’s first Nobel Prize. He was knighted in 1934.
The word banting was associated with dieting for
many years.
In February 1941 he was killed in an air disaster in
Newfoundland.
Bárány, Robert (1876–1936) Austrian Physician
Robert Bárány was born on April 22, 1876, in Vienna,
the eldest son of the manager of a farm estate. His
mother, Maria Hock, was the daughter of a well-known
Prague scientist. The young Bárány contracted tuberculosis,
which resulted in permanent knee problems.
He completed medical studies at Vienna University
in 1900, and in 1903, he accepted a post as demonstrator
at the otological clinic.
Bárány developed a rotational method for testing
the middle ear, known as the vestibular system, that
commands physical balance by integrating an array of
neurological, biological, visual, and cognitive processes
to maintain balance. The middle ear’s vestibular system
is made up of three semicircular canals and an otolith.
Inside the canals are fluid and hairlike cilia that register
movement. As the head moves, so does the fluid, which
in turn moves the cilia that send signals to the brain
and nervous system. The function of the otolith, a
series of calcium fibers that remain oriented to gravity,
is similar. Both help the body to stay upright. Bárány’s
contributions in this area won him the Nobel Prize in
physiology in 1914. To receive his award, he had to be
released from a Russian prisoner of war camp in 1916
at the request of the prince of Sweden.
After the war he accepted the post of principal and
professor of the Otological Institute in Uppsala, where
he remained for the remainder of his life.
During the latter part of his life, Bárány studied the
causes of muscular rheumatism. Although he suffered a
stroke, this did not prevent him from writing on the
subject. He died at Uppsala on April 8, 1936. An elite
organization called the Bárány Society is named after
him and is devoted to vestibular research.
34 bacteriochlorophyllbarchan A crescent-shaped dune with wings, or
horns, pointing downwind.
bark The outer layer or “skin” of stems and trunks
that forms a protective layer. It is composed of all the
tissues outside the vascular cambium in a plant growing
in thickness. Bark consists of phloem, phelloderm,
cork cambium, and cork.
Barr body One of the two X chromosomes in each
somatic cell of a female is genetically inactivated. The
Barr body is a dense object or mass of condensed sex
chromatin lying along the inside of the nuclear envelope
in female mammalian cells; it represents the inactivated
X chromosome. X inactivation occurs around the
16th day of embryonic development. Mary Lyon, a
British cytogeneticist, introduced the term Barr body.
basal body (kinetosome) A eukaryotic cell organelle
within the cell body where a flagellum arises, which is
usually composed of nine longitudinally oriented,
equally spaced sets of three microtubules. They usually
occur in pairs and are structurally identical to a
centriole.
Not to be confused with basal body temperature
(BBT), which is the lowest body temperature of the
day, usually the temperature upon awakening in the
morning. BBT is usually charted daily and is used to
determine fertility or to achieve pregnancy.
basal metabolic rate (BMR) BMR is the number of
calories your body burns at rest to maintain normal
body functions and changes with age, weight, height,
gender, diet, and exercise.
base A substance that reduces the hydrogen ion concentration
in a solution. A base has less free hydrogen
ions (H+) than hydroxyl ions (OH–) and has a pH of
more than 7 on a scale of 0–14. A base is created when
positively charged ions (base cations) such as magnesium,
sodium, potassium, and calcium increase the pH
base 35
An example of a deflation zone (low ground behind fore dunes) and an example of barchan dunes in Morro Bay, California. (Courtesy of
Tim McCabe)of water when released to solution. They have a slippery
feel in water and a bitter taste. A base will turn
red litmus paper blue (acids turn blue litmus red). The
three types of bases are: Arrhenius, any chemical that
increases the number of free hydroxide ions (OH–)
when added to a water-based solution; Bronsted or
Bronsted-Lowry, any chemical that acts as a proton
acceptor in a chemical reaction; and Lewis, any chemical
that donates two electrons to form a covalent bond
during a chemical reaction. Bases are also known as
alkali or alkaline substances, and when added to acids
they form salts. Some common examples of bases are
soap, ammonia, and lye.
See also ACID; BRØNSTED BASE; HARD BASE; LEWIS
BASE.
basement membrane The thin extracellular layer
composed of fibrous elements, proteins, and space-filling
molecules that attaches the epithelium tissue
(which forms the superficial layer of skin and some
organs and the inner lining of blood vessels, ducts,
body cavities, and the interior of the respiratory, digestive,
urinary, and reproductive systems) to the underlying
connective tissue. It is made up of a superficial
basal lamina produced by the overlying epithelial tissue,
and an underlying reticular lamina, which is the
deeper of two layers and produced by the underlying
connective tissue. It is the layer of tissue that cells “sit”
or rest on.
base pairing The specific association between two
complementary strands of nucleic acids that results from
the formation of hydrogen bonds between the base components
(adenine [A], guanine [G], thymine [T], cytosine
[C], uracil [U] of the NUCLEOTIDES of each strand (the
lines indicate the number of hydrogen bonds):
A=T and G
C in DNA, A=U and G
C (and in some cases GU) in RNA
Single-stranded nucleic acid molecules can adopt a
partially double-stranded structure through intrastrand
base pairing.
See also NUCLEOSIDES.
base-pair substitution There are two main types of
mutations within a gene: base-pair substitutions and
base-pair insertions or deletions. A base-pair substitution
is a point mutation; it is the replacement of one
nucleotide and its partner from the complementary
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) strand with another pair
of nucleotides. Bases are one of five compounds—adenine,
guanine, cytosine, thymine, and uracil—that form
the genetic code in DNA and ribonucleic acid (RNA).
basicity constant See ACIDITY CONSTANT.
basidiomycetes A group of fungi whose sexual
spores (basidiospores) are borne in a basidium, a clubshaped
reproductive cell. Includes the orders Agaricales
(mushrooms) and Aphyllophorales.
See also FUNGI.
basidium (plural, basidia) A specialized clubshaped
sexual reproductive cell found in the fertile area
of the hymenium, the fertile sexual spore-bearing tissues
of all basidiomycetes, and that produces sexual
spores on the gills of mushrooms. Shaped like a baseball
bat, it possesses four slightly inwardly curved
horns or spikes called sterigma on which the basidiospores
are attached.
Batesian mimicry A type of mimicry described by H.
W. Bates in 1861 that describes the condition where a
harmless species, the mimic, looks like a different species
that is poisonous or otherwise harmful to predators, the
model, and in this way gains security and protection by
counterfeiting its appearance. Since many predators have
become sick from eating a poisonous animal, they will
avoid any similar looking animals in the future. Examples
of Batesian mimicry include the Viceroy mimicking
the Monarch butterfly and the clearwing moth that
resembles a bee by having yellow and black coloring.
See also MIMICRY.
bathyal zone The deepest part of the ocean where
light does not penetrate.
See also PELAGIC ZONE.
36 basement membraneB cell or lymphocyte A type of white blood cell,
or lymphocyte, that makes up 25 percent or more of
the white blood cells in the body. The other class of
lymphocyte is T cells. B cells develop in the bone marrow
and spleen, and during infections they are transformed
into plasma cells that produce large quantities
of antibody (immunoglobulin) directed at specific
pathogens. A cancer of the B lymphocytes is called a
B-cell lymphoma.
behavioral ecology A subdiscipline that seeks to
understand the functions, or fitness consequences,
of behavior in which animals interact with their
environment.
Békésy, Georg von (1899–1972) Hungarian Physicist
Georg von Békésy was born in Budapest, Hungary,
on June 3, 1899, to Alexander von Békésy, a
diplomat, and his wife Paula. He received his early education
in Munich, Constantinople, Budapest, and in a
private school in Zurich. He received a Ph.D. in physics
in 1923 from the University of Budapest for a method
he developed for determining molecular weight. He
began working for the Hungarian Telephone and Post
Office Laboratory in Budapest until 1946. During the
years 1939–46 he was also professor of experimental
physics at the University of Budapest.
While his research was concerned mainly with
problems of long-distance telephone transmission, he
conducted the study of the ear as a main component of
the transmission system. He designed a telephone earphone
and developed techniques for rapid, nondestructive
dissection of the cochlea.
In 1946 he moved to Sweden as a guest of the
Karolinska Institute and did research at the Technical
Institute in Stockholm. Here he developed a new type
of audiometer. The following year he moved to the
United States to work at Harvard University in the
Psycho-Acoustic Laboratory and developed a
mechanical model of the inner ear. He received the
Nobel Prize in 1961 for his discoveries concerning
the physical mechanisms of stimulation within the
cochlea. He moved on to the University of Hawaii in
1966, where a special laboratory was built for him.
He received numerous honors during his lifetime.
He died on June 13, 1972, in Honolulu.
benthic zone A lower region of a freshwater or
marine body. It is below the pelagic zone and above the
abyssal zone, which is the benthic zone below 9,000 m.
Organisms that live on or in the sediment in these environments
are called benthos.
See also OCEANIC ZONE.
beringia All of the unglaciated area that encompassed
northwestern North America and northeastern
Asia, including the Bering Strait, during the last ice age.
berry A pulpy and stoneless fruit containing one or
more seeds, e.g., strawberry.
beta sheet Preferentially called a beta pleated sheet;
a regular structure in an extended polypeptide chain,
beta sheet 37
The Monarch butterfly is a chemically protected species that is
mimicked by the Viceroy. This is known as Batesian mimicry.
(Courtesy of Tim McCabe)stabilized in the form of a sheet by hydrogen bonds
between CO and NH groups of adjacent (parallel or
antiparallel) chains.
beta strand Element of a BETA SHEET. One of the
strands that is hydrogen bonded to a parallel or
antiparallel strand to form a beta sheet.
beta turn A hairpin structure in a polypeptide chain
reversing its direction by forming a hydrogen bond
between the CO group of AMINO ACID RESIDUE n with
the NH group of residue (n+3).
See also HELIX.
biennial A plant that requires two years or at least
more than one season to complete its life cycle. In the
first year, plants form vegetative growth, and in the second
year they flower. (Latin biennialis, from biennis;
bis, twice, and annus, year)
bifunctional ligand A LIGAND that is capable of
simultaneous use of two of its donor atoms to bind to
one or more CENTRAL ATOMS.
See also AMBIDENTATE.
bilateral symmetry Characterizing a body form
having two similar sides—one side of an object is the
mirror image of its other half—with definite upper and
lower surfaces and anterior and posterior ends. Also
called symmetry across an axis.
In plants, the term applies to flowers that can be
divided into two equal halves by only one line through
the middle. Most leaves are bilaterally symmetrical.
bilateria Members of the branch of eumetazoans
possessing bilateral symmetry. Many bilaterian animals
exhibit cephalization, an evolutionary trend
toward concentration of sensory structures, mouth,
and nerve ganglia at the anterior end of the body. All
bilaterally symmetrical animals are triploblastic, that
is, having three germ layers: ectoderm, endoderm, and
mesoderm.
binary fission A type of asexual reproduction in
prokaryotes (cells or organisms lacking a membranebound,
structurally discrete nucleus and other subcellular
compartments) in which a cell divides or splits into
two “daughter” cells, each containing a complete copy
of the genetic material of the parent. Examples of organisms
that reproduce this way are bacteria, paramecium,
and Schizosaccharomyces pombe (an ascomycetous
species of yeast). Also known as transverse fission.
binding constant See STABILITY CONSTANT.
binding site A specific region (or atom) in a molecular
entity that is capable of entering into a stabilizing
interaction with another molecular entity. An example
of such an interaction is that of an ACTIVE SITE in an
enzyme with its SUBSTRATE. Typical forms of interaction
are by hydrogen bonding, COORDINATION, and
ion-pair formation. Two binding sites in different
molecular entities are said to be complementary if their
interaction is stabilizing.
binomial (binomial name) Each organism is named
using a Latin-based code consisting of a combination
of two names, the first being a generic (genus) name
and the second a specific trivial name, which, together,
38 beta strand
Amoeba proteus showing cell division via binary fission.
Amoebas are protozoans, the simplest form of animal life.
(Courtesy of Hideki Horikami)constitute the scientific name of a species. Lupinus
perennis, or wild blue lupine, is an example. Both
names are italicized, and both names used together
constitute the species name. This is an example of the
binomial nomenclature, critical to the system of classification
of plants and animals. Linnaeus, a Swedish
naturalist, developed the system in the 18th century.
The hierarchy lists the smallest group to largest group:
species, genus, family, order, class, division, and kingdom.
The first person to formally describe a species is
often included, sometimes as an abbreviation, when the
species is first mentioned in a research article (e.g.,
Lupinus perennis L., where L. = Linnaeus, who first
produced this binomial name and provided an original
description of this plant).
binuclear Less frequently used term for the IUPAC
recommended term dinuclear.
See also NUCLEARITY.
bioassay A procedure for determining the concentration,
purity, and/or biological activity of a substance
(e.g., vitamin, hormone, plant growth factor, antibiotic,
enzyme) by measuring its effect on an organism, tissue,
cell, enzyme, or receptor preparation compared with a
standard preparation.
bioavailability The availability of a food component
or a XENOBIOTIC to an organ or organism.
biocatalyst A catalyst of biological origin, typically
an ENZYME.
bioconjugate A molecular species produced by living
systems of biological origin when it is composed of two
parts of different origins, e.g., a conjugate of a xenobiotic
with some groups, such as glutathione, sulfate, or
glucuronic acid, to make it soluble in water or compartmentalized
within the cell.
bioconversion The conversion of one substance to
another by biological means. The fermentation of sugars
to alcohols, catalyzed by yeasts, is an example of
bioconversion.
See also BIOTRANSFORMATION.
biodiversity (biological diversity) The totality of
genes, species, and ecosystems in a particular environment,
region, or the entire world. Usually refers to the
variety and variability of living organisms and the
ecological relationships in which they occur. It can be
the number of different species and their relative frequencies
in a particular area, and it can be organized
on several levels, from specific species complexes to
entire ecosystems or even molecular-level heredity
studies.
bioenergetics The study of the energy transfers in
and between organisms and their environments and the
regulation of those pathways. The term is also used for
a form of psychotherapy that works through the body
to engage the emotions and is based on the work of
Wilhelm Reich and psychiatrist Alexander Lowen in
the 1950s.
biofacies A characteristic set of fossil fauna. Facies is
a geological term that means “aspect” and is used for
defining subdivisions based on an aspect or characteristic
of a rock formation, such as lithofacies, based on
physical characteristics, or biofacies, based on the fossil
content.
biogeochemical cycles Both energy and inorganic
nutrients flow through ecosystems. However, energy is
a one-way process that drives the movement of nutrients
and is then lost, whereas nutrients are cycled back
into the system between organisms and their environments
by way of molecules, ions, or elements. These
various nutrient circuits, which involve both biotic and
abiotic components of ecosystems, are called biogeochemical
cycles. Major biogeochemical cycles include
the water cycle, carbon cycle, oxygen cycle, nitrogen
cycle, phosphorus cycle, sulfur cycle, and calcium cycle.
Biogeochemical cycles can take place on a cellular level
(absorption of carbon dioxide by a cell) all the way to
global levels (atmosphere and ocean interactions).
biogeochemical cycles 39These cycles take place through the biosphere, lithosphere,
hydrosphere, and atmosphere.
biogeographic boundary (zoogeographical region)
Six to nine regions that contain broadly similar fauna.
Consists of Nearctic, Palearctic, Neotropical, Aethiopian,
Oriental, and Australian, and some include Holarctic,
Palaeotropical, and Oceana.
biogeography The study of the past and present distribution
of life.
bioisostere (nonclassical isostere) A compound
resulting from the exchange of an atom or of a group
of atoms with another broadly similar atom or group
of atoms. The objective of a bioisosteric replacement
is to create a new compound with similar biological
properties to the parent compound. The bioisosteric
replacement can be physicochemically or topologically
based.
See also ISOSTERE.
bioleaching Extraction of metals from ores or soil
by biological processes, mostly by microorganisms.
biological clock The internal timekeeping that
drives or coordinates a circadian rhythm.
biological control (integrated pest management)
Using living organisms to control other living organisms
(pests), e.g., aphids eaten by lady beetles.
biological half-life The time at which the amount of
a biomolecule in a living organism has been reduced by
one half.
See also HALF-LIFE.
biological magnification (bioaccumulation) The
increase in the concentration of heavy metals (e.g., mercury)
or organic contaminants (e.g., chlorinated hydrocarbons
[CBCs]) in organisms as a result of their
consumption within a food chain/web. An excellent
example is the process by which contaminants such as
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) accumulate or magnify
as they move up the food chain. For example, PCBs
concentrate in tissue and internal organs, and as big fish
eat little fish, they accumulate all the PCBs that have
been eaten by everyone below them in the food chain.
biological species A population or group of populations
whose members can interbreed or have the potential
to interbreed.
See also SPECIES.
bioluminescence The process of producing light by
a chemical reaction by a living organism, e.g., glowworms,
fireflies, and jellyfish. Usually produced in
organs called photopores or light organs, bioluminescence
can be used for luring prey or as a courting
behavior.
biomass The dry weight of organic matter in unit area
or volume, usually expressed as mass or weight of a
group of organisms in a particular habitat. The term also
refers to organic matter that is available on a renewable
basis such as forests, agricultural crops, wood and wood
wastes, animals, and plants.
40 biogeographic boundary
organic
compounds
in animals
respiration
and decay
feeding
photosynthesis
respiration combustion
and decay
fossil fuels
(coal and peat)
organic
compounds
in green plants
CO2
free carbon
dioxide in the
atmosphere
The carbon cycle, one of the main biogeochemical cycles that
processes and transfers nutrients from organisms to their
environment.biome A large-scale recognizable grouping, a distinct
ecosystem, that includes many communities of a similar
nature that have adapted to a particular environment.
Deserts, forests, grasslands, tundra, and the oceans are
biomes. Biomes have changed naturally and moved
many times during the history of life on Earth. In more
recent times, change has been the result of humaninduced
activity.
biomembrane Organized sheetlike assemblies, consisting
mainly of proteins and lipids (bilayers), that act
as highly selective permeability barriers. Biomembranes
contain specific molecular pumps and gates, receptors,
and enzymes.
biomimetic Refers to a laboratory procedure designed
to imitate a natural chemical process. Also refers to a
compound that mimics a biological material in its
structure or function.
biomineralization The synthesis of inorganic crystalline
or amorphous mineral-like materials by living
organisms. Among the minerals synthesized biologically
in various forms of life are fluorapatite (Ca5(PO4)3F),
hydroxyapatite, magnetite (Fe3O4), and calcium carbonate
(CaCO3).
biopolymers Macromolecules, including proteins,
nucleic acids, and polysaccharides, formed by living
organisms.
bioprecursor prodrug A PRODRUG that does not
imply the linkage to a carrier group, but results from a
bioprecursor prodrug 41
Cuatraciénagas dunes in Mexico showing an example of the biodiversity of plants found in the xeric conditions of gypsum sands and
deserts. (Courtesy of Tim McCabe)molecular modification of the active principle itself.
This modification generates a new compound, able to
be transformed metabolically or chemically, the resulting
compound being the active principle.
biosensor A device that uses specific biochemical
reactions mediated by isolated enzymes, immunosystems,
tissues, organelles, or whole cells to detect chemical
compounds, usually by electrical, thermal, or
optical signals.
biosphere The entire portion of the Earth between the
outer portion of the geosphere (the physical elements of
the Earth’s surface crust and interior) and the inner portion
of the atmosphere that is inhabited by life; it is the
sum of all the planet’s communities and ecosystems.
biotechnology The industrial or commercial manipulation
and use of living organisms or their components
to improve human health and food production,
either on the molecular level (genetics, gene splicing, or
use of recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid [DNA]) or in
more visible areas such as cattle breeding.
biotic Pertains to the living organisms in the environment,
including entire populations and ecosystems.
biotransformation A chemical transformation mediated
by living organisms or ENZYME preparations. The
chemical conversion of substances by living organisms
or enzyme preparations.
See also BIOCONVERSION.
bivalve A mollusk having two valves or shells that
are hinged together, e.g., mussels and clams.
blastocoel The fluid-filled cavity that forms in the
center of the blastula embryo. The blastula is an early
stage in the development of an ovum, consisting of a
hollow sphere of cells enclosing the blastocoel.
See also BLASTULA.
blastocyst An embryonic stage in mammals; a hollow
ball of 30–150 cells produced one week after FERTILIZATION
in humans. It is a sphere made up of an outer
layer of cells called the trophectoderm, a fluid-filled
cavity called the BLASTOCOEL, and a cluster of cells on
the interior called the INNER CELL MASS. It is the inner
cell mass that becomes what is known as the FETUS.
See also EMBRYO.
blastopore The opening of the ARCHENTERON
(primitive gut) in the gastrula that develops into the
mouth in protostomes (metazoans such as the nematodes,
flatworms, and mollusks that exhibit determinate,
spiral cleavage and develop a mouth from the
blastopore) and the anus in deuterostomes. (Animals
such as the chordates and echinoderms in which the
first opening in the embryo becomes the anus, while
the mouth appears at the other end of the digestive
system.)
42 biosensor
Light micrograph of a human embryo at the blastocyst stage. This
early blastocyst is about four days old, appearing as a hollow ball
of cells. On around day six, the embryo will begin to implant into
the wall of the uterus. Magnification unknown. (Courtesy ©
Pascal Goetgheluck/Photo Researchers, Inc.)blastula Early stage of animal development of an
embryo, where a ball forms consisting of a single layer
of cells that surrounds the fluid-filled cavity called the
blastocoel. The term blastula is often used interchangeably
with the term blastocyst.
See also BLASTOCOEL; BLASTOCYST.
bleomycin (BLM) A glycopeptide molecule that can
serve as a metal-chelating ligand. The Fe(III) complex
of bleomycin is an antitumor agent, and its activity is
associated with DNA cleavage.
BLM See BLEOMYCIN.
blood Blood is an animal fluid that transports oxygen
from the lungs to body tissues and returns carbon
dioxide from body tissues to the lungs through a network
of vessels such as veins, arteries, and capillaries.
It transports nourishment from digestion, hormones
from glands, carries disease-fighting substances to tissues,
as well as wastes to the kidneys. Blood contains
red and white blood cells and platelets that are responsible
for a variety of functions, from transporting substances
to fighting invasion from foreign substances.
Some 55 percent of blood is a clear liquid called plasma.
The average adult has about five liters of blood.
See also ARTERY; CAPILLARY; VEIN.
blood-brain barrier (BBB) The blood-brain barrier
is a collection of cells that press together to block many
substances from entering the brain while allowing others
to pass. It is a specialized arrangement of brain capillaries
that restricts the passage of most substances into
the brain, thereby preventing dramatic fluctuations in
the brain’s environment. It maintains the chemical environment
for neuron functions and protects the brain
from the entry of foreign and harmful substances. It
allows substances in the brain such as glucose, certain
ions, and oxygen and others to enter, while unwanted
ones are carried out by the endothelial cells. It is a
defensive system to protect the central nervous system.
What is little understood is how the blood-brain
barrier is regulated, or why certain diseases are able to
manipulate and pass through the barrier.
There is evidence that multiple sclerosis attacks
occur during breakdowns of the blood-brain barrier. A
study in rats showed that flavinoids, such as those
found in blueberries and grape seeds among others, can
inhibit blood-brain barrier breakdown under conditions
that normally lead to such breakdown.
Researchers at the University of Maryland School
of Medicine in Baltimore have identified a receptor in
the human brain that regulates the interface between
the bloodstream and the blood-brain barrier and
could lead to a new understanding of this nearly
impenetrable barrier and to treatment of diseases that
affect the brain. They found that two proteins,
zonulin and zot, unlock the cell barrier in the intestine,
attach themselves to receptors in the intestine to
open the junctions between the cells, and allow substances
to be absorbed. The new research indicates
that zonulin and zot also react with similar receptors
in the brain, suggesting that it may become feasible to
develop a new generation of drugs able to cross the
blood-brain barrier.
blood-brain barrier 43
Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) showing three types of cells
found in human blood. At right is a red blood cell (erythrocyte), a
biconcave disc that transports oxygen around the body. A white
blood cell (center) is roughly spherical with microvilli projecting
from its surface. Different types of white cells are active in the
body’s immune response to infection. The waferlike cell at left is a
blood platelet, which functions to control clotting and thus prevents
bleeding from damaged vessels. Each cubic millimeter of
blood contains approximately 5 million red cells, 7,000 white cells,
and 250,000 platelets. Magnification: ×3,850 at 35-mm size, ×27,000
at 8 × 10-in. size. (Courtesy © NIBSC/Photo Researchers, Inc.)44 blood-brain barrier
Blood Identification through the Ages
by John C. Brenner and Demetra Xythalis
Blood is a fluid that circulates throughout the body, transporting
oxygen, nutrients and waste materials. Blood is
composed of various formed elements such as red blood
cells (erythrocytes), white blood cells (leukocytes), platelets
(thrombocytes), and a liquid fraction called plasma, each
containing a vast array of biochemical constituents. Red
blood cells comprise the majority of the formed elements in
the blood. Hemoglobin is a chemical that is found in red
blood cells, consisting of an iron-containing pigment, heme,
and a protein component, globin. The components of blood
are controlled genetically and have the potential of being a
highly distinctive feature for personal identification.
The field of forensic science is the study and practice
of the application of natural sciences for the purpose of the
law. One of the disciplines in forensic science is forensic
serology, which involves the identification and characterization
of blood and body fluids, either in a liquid or dried
state, in association with a criminal or civil investigation.
Blood and dried bloodstains are two of the most important
and most frequently encountered types of evidence in criminal
investigation of crimes such as homicides, assaults,
and rapes.
Since the 1900s, forensic serologists have attempted to
identify blood and/or bloodstains found at crime scenes.
When serology was in its early stages, stains at crime
scenes were identified just as blood. Now that forensic
serologists can individualize human blood by identifying all
of its known factors, the result could be evidence of the
strongest kind for linking a suspect to the crime scene or
finding a lost victim.
When examining dried bloodstains, the forensic serologists
are trying to determine the following: (1) Is the stain
blood? (2) If the stain is blood, is it human or animal? (3) If
probe DNA
labeling with
fluorescent dye
denature
&
hybridize
Fluorescence in situ hybridization is a process that vividly paints chromosomes or portions of chromosomes with fluorescent
molecules. This technique is useful for identifying chromosomal abnormalities and gene mapping. (Courtesy of Darryl Leja, NHGRI,
National Institutes of Health)44 blood-brain barrier
Blood Identification through the Ages
by John C. Brenner and Demetra Xythalis
Blood is a fluid that circulates throughout the body, transporting
oxygen, nutrients and waste materials. Blood is
composed of various formed elements such as red blood
cells (erythrocytes), white blood cells (leukocytes), platelets
(thrombocytes), and a liquid fraction called plasma, each
containing a vast array of biochemical constituents. Red
blood cells comprise the majority of the formed elements in
the blood. Hemoglobin is a chemical that is found in red
blood cells, consisting of an iron-containing pigment, heme,
and a protein component, globin. The components of blood
are controlled genetically and have the potential of being a
highly distinctive feature for personal identification.
The field of forensic science is the study and practice
of the application of natural sciences for the purpose of the
law. One of the disciplines in forensic science is forensic
serology, which involves the identification and characterization
of blood and body fluids, either in a liquid or dried
state, in association with a criminal or civil investigation.
Blood and dried bloodstains are two of the most important
and most frequently encountered types of evidence in criminal
investigation of crimes such as homicides, assaults,
and rapes.
Since the 1900s, forensic serologists have attempted to
identify blood and/or bloodstains found at crime scenes.
When serology was in its early stages, stains at crime
scenes were identified just as blood. Now that forensic
serologists can individualize human blood by identifying all
of its known factors, the result could be evidence of the
strongest kind for linking a suspect to the crime scene or
finding a lost victim.
When examining dried bloodstains, the forensic serologists
are trying to determine the following: (1) Is the stain
blood? (2) If the stain is blood, is it human or animal? (3) If
probe DNA
labeling with
fluorescent dye
denature
&
hybridize
Fluorescence in situ hybridization is a process that vividly paints chromosomes or portions of chromosomes with fluorescent
molecules. This technique is useful for identifying chromosomal abnormalities and gene mapping. (Courtesy of Darryl Leja, NHGRI,
National Institutes of Health)blood-brain barrier 45
the stain is human blood, can it be associated with a particular
individual? The forensic serologist, in an attempt to do
blood identification, uses two categories of tests: the presumptive
test, which is nonspecific for blood, and the confirmatory,
which is specific for blood species.
The first step in determining whether a crime scene
stain is blood involves the use of a chemical screening test
or presumptive test. Some presumptive tests used by forensic
serologists include benzidine (introduced in 1904), phenolphthalein
(1901), leucomalachite green (1904), and
luminol (1928).
The identification of benzidine as a carcinogen led to
its discontinuance as a screening test for blood. Another
chemical used for screening stains for blood is phenolphthalein.
Both tests consist of a two-step procedure. The
first step is to moisten a white filter paper with distilled
water. Apply the filter paper to the suspected bloodstain.
A portion of the stain will transfer onto the moistened
paper. Add the leucomalachite green reagent to the
paper. The second step is to add hydrogen peroxide to the
filter paper and look for a color change on the paper. A
positive result will yeild a bluish-green color. When phenolphthalein
is mixed with a dried bloodstain, with the
addition of hydrogen peroxide, the hemoglobin in the
blood causes the formation of a deep pink color. The leucomalachite
green test is a presumptive test for blood
that is used by many laboratories today. The heme group
in hemoglobin catalyzes the oxidation by peroxide of the
malachite green to produce a bluish-green reaction when
the suspected stain is blood.
Luminol is a chemical reagent that is very useful in
locating small traces of blood at a crime scene. Unlike the
above-mentioned chemical screening test, the reaction of
luminol with blood results in the production of light rather
than color. The one requirement for the use of luminol is
that the scene be completely dark. Luminol is a chemical
that can be used as a spray at crime scenes and will react
with any blood present, causing a luminescence.
The second step in blood identification is the use of
confirmatory tests. Confirmatory blood identification tests
are specific for the heme component of hemoglobin. A positive
confirmatory test result is taken as positive proof of the
presence of blood in a questioned stain. Some of the confirmatory
tests include: microcrystalline tests, Teichmann and
Takayama tests, ring precipitin test, gel diffusion method,
and electrophoresis (1907). The Teichmann (1853) and the
Takayama (1905) confirmatory tests are based on the observation
that heme, in the presence of certain chemicals, will
form characteristic crystals that can be seen using a microscope.
The precipitin test is based on antibody molecules
interacting with antigens to form a precipitate that can be
visualized under the proper light conditions or with a stain.
Serologists use this test to determine whether the origin of
the bloodstain is human or animal. The ring precipitin test
involves layering a dilute saline extract of the bloodstain on
top of the antihuman serum in a capillary tube. Because of
the density of the antihuman serum, the bloodstain extract
will layer on top, and the two solutions will not mix, thus
forming a cloudy ring or band at the interface between the
two solutions.
The gel diffusion method is based on the fact that antigens
and antibodies will diffuse, or move toward each
other, on an agar-gel-coated plate, such as the Ouchterlony
plate. The extracted bloodstain and the human antiserum
are placed in separate holes opposite each other on the gel.
A white precipitate line will form where the antigens and
antibodies meet if the bloodstain is of human origin.
The electrophoretic method, or crossover electrophoresis,
is a sensitive method using an electric current
that is passed through a gel plate. A line of precipitation
formed between the hole containing the bloodstain extract
and the hole containing the human antiserum denotes a
specific antigen antibody reaction.
The next generation of confirmatory test, which in
some forensic laboratories has replaced the electrophoretic
or crossover electrophoresis is called the One Step
ABAcard HemaTrace. This test utilizes a combination of
monoclonal and polyclonal antibody reagents to selectively
detect human hemoglobin. Adding a portion of the prepared
elution from the bloodstain to the sample well and observing
the development of indicative colored lines conduct the
test. The species specificity of the reaction is based on the
recognition by antibodies of antigens displayed on human
hemoglobin. A positive result is visualized because goldconjugated,
monoclonal antibody-Hb immune complexes
are captured and condensed on the test mambrane by stationary
phase polyclonal anti-human hemoglobin antibodies,
causing the gold particles to condense. This produces a
pink-colored line at the test area. Absence of this colored
line indicates a negative result.
There are many different substances in human blood
that can be grouped to individualize the blood. Blood contains
many inherited factors referred to as genetic markers.
Determination of factors in a person’s blood is called blood
grouping or blood typing. True individualization of a specimen
of blood would mean that a sufficiently large number of
genetic markers could be typed so that nobody else in the
(continues)46 blood-brain barrier
world would have that particular combination of genetic
markers.
In 1900, Dr. Karl Landsteiner announced one of the
most significant discoveries of the 20th century—the typing
of human blood. Out of Landsteiner’s work came the classification
system that is called the ABO system. Blood group
systems are the most well known and widely recognized
class of genetic markers.
Bloodstains can be typed for ABO using two different
procedures: (1) by detecting the antibodies of the serum or
(2) by detecting the antigens of the red cells. Detection of
the antibodies is the older method. This procedure was first
extensively employed by Lattes in Italy in 1913. The procedure
has been modified and improved with the development
of new antisera. In this test, which detects antibodies in
dried bloodstains, two portions of the stains are placed onto
microscope slides. Type A red cells are added to one glass
slide, and Type B red cells to the other slide. If the bloodstain
on the slide contains anti-A antibodies, the A red cells
that were added will agglutinate, which looks like
crosslinked cells under the microscope. Agglutination of the
A cells indicates that anti-A is present, and therefore, that
the bloodstain is of blood group B.
The other approach to typing dried bloodstains is the
detection of the antigens that are on the surface of the red
blood cells. When blood dries, the red cells break apart, but
the red blood cell antigens are still present in the dried stains.
The two major methods that have been used are absorptioninhibition
and absorption-elution. The absorption-inhibition
method depends on the ability to estimate the amount of
antibody present in an antiserum before and after exposure
to a stain extract containing a possible antigen.
The absorption-elution method is based on the theory
that blood-group antibodies can bind to their specific redcell
surface antigens in bloodstains. The antigen-antibody
complex can then be dissociated and the antibodies recovered.
The breaking of the antigen-antibody bond can be
done by increasing the temperature. Removing specific
antibodies from complexes with their antigens in this way is
called elution.
Another main class of blood constituents used as
genetic markers is the polymorphic enzymes. The enzymes
of interest to the forensic serologists are primarily located
within the red blood cell and are commonly referred to as
isoenzymes. These enzyme forms can be grouped from a
bloodstain to further individualize the blood. Red-cell isoenzymes
are frequently typed by a procedure called electrophoresis.
This procedure brings about the separation of
different proteins based primarily upon differences in net
charge, and it is usually done with some kind of starch-gel
or on a cellulose acetate support. The most important
enzyme systems used in forensic serology are phosphoglucomutase
(PGM), erythrocyte acid phosphatase (EAP),
esterase D (ESD), adenylate kinase (AK), adenosine deaminase
(ADA), and glyoxalase I (GLO).
The main features of the molecular architecture of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) were first formulated by Watson
and Crick in 1953, who at the same time pointed out
how the proposed structure would account for the three
basic attributes of genetic material: gene specificity, gene
replication, and gene mutation. It was not until 1985 that
forensic scientists discovered that portions of the DNA
structure of certain genes are as unique to an individual as
their fingerprints. Alec Jeffreys and his colleagues at
Leicester University, England, who were responsible for
these revelations, named the process for isolating and
reading these DNA markers “DNA fingerprinting.” The DNA
typing of biological fluid and stains finally gives the forensic
scientist the ability to link crime scene evidence such as
bloodstains to a single individual.
The separation of DNA fragments of different sizes
usually can be efficiently accomplished by agarose gel
electrophoresis. The agarose gels are thick, which makes
them difficult to process in terms of hybridization, washing,
and autoradiography. To overcome these problems, a
transfer technique was developed that transferred the
DNA fragments from the agarose gel onto a nylon membrane.
This technique was first described by E. Southern in
1975, and it is called Southern blotting. If a specific recognition
base sequence is present, the restriction enzyme
recognizing that site will cleave the DNA molecule, resulting
in fragments of specific base-pair lengths. Restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLPs) generates different
DNA fragment lengths by the action of specific endonucleases.
To visualize the separate RFLPs, a nylon sheet is
treated with radioactively labeled probes containing a
base sequence complementary to the RFLPs being identified,
a process called hybridization. Once the radioactive
sequences are on the nylon membrane, the membrane is
exposed to a piece of X-ray film. The developed X-ray film
shows DNA fragments that combined with radioactive
probe. The size of the bloodstain (i.e., the amount of blood
required) on forensic evidence and the time required to
obtain the DNA information from the evidence were two
drawbacks to this procedure.
As the push to individualize forensic bloodstain proceeded,
the next advancement came in 1983, with molecular
Blood Identification through the Ages
(continued)blood pressure The hydrostatic force that blood
exerts against the wall of a blood vessel. This pressure
is greatest during the contraction of the ventricles of
the heart (systolic pressure), which forces blood into
the arterial system. Pressure falls to its lowest level
when the heart is filling with blood while at rest (diastolic
pressure). Blood pressure varies depending on the
energy of the heart action, the elasticity of the walls of
the arteries, and the volume and viscosity (resistance)
of the blood. Blood pressure rises and falls throughout
the day.
When the blood flows through the vessels at a
greater than normal force, reading consistently above
140/90 mm Hg (millimeters of mercury), it is called
hypertension or high blood pressure. High blood pressure
strains the heart; harms the arteries; and increases
the risk of heart attack, stroke, and kidney problems.
About one in every five adults in the United States has
high blood pressure. Elevated blood pressure occurs
more often in men than in women, and in African
Americans it occurs almost twice as often as in Caucasians.
Essential hypertension (hypertension with no
known cause) is not fully understood, but it accounts
for about 90 percent of all hypertension cases in people
over 45 years of age.
Low blood pressure is called hypotension and is an
abnormal condition in which the blood pressure is
lower than 90/60 mm Hg. When the blood pressure is
too low, there is inadequate blood flow to the heart,
brain, and other vital organs.
An optimal blood pressure is less than 120/80 mm
Hg.
blotting A technique used for transferring DNA,
RNA, or protein from gels to a suitable binding matrix,
such as nitrocellulose or nylon paper, while maintaining
the same physical separation.
blue copper protein An ELECTRON TRANSFER PROTEIN
containing a TYPE 1 COPPER site. Characterized by
a strong absorption in the visible region and an EPR
(ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE SPECTROSCOPY)
blue copper protein 47
biologist Kary Mullis’s development of a process called
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). PCR has revolutionized
the approach to the recovery of DNA from a variety of
sources. Availability of oligonucleotide primers is the key to
the amplification process. PCR consists of three steps,
beginning with the denaturing of the double-strand DNA,
separated by heating to 90–96°C. The second step involves
hybridization or annealing, in which one primer is annealed
to the flanking end of each DNA target sequence complementary
strand. The third step uses a thermally stable Taq
polymerase to mediate the extension of the primers. The
result is two new helices in place of the first, each one
composed of the original strands plus its newly assembled
complementary strand.
All eukaryotic genomes contain regions of simple
repetitive DNA, called short tandem repeats (STR) or
microsatellites, which consist of variable numbers of tandem
repeats (VNTRs). The number of repeats at an STR
locus can be highly variable among individuals, resulting in
different-length polymorphisms that can be detected by
relatively simple use of the PCR-based assays. STR loci are
useful to forensic science because of their small range of
alleles, their high sensitivity, and suitability even if the DNA
is degraded. Today the forensic laboratory using the
PCR/STR analysis can individualize bloodstains obtained
from forensic evidence with a very high probability of identifying
a single individual.
In the past, forensic scientists who handled biological
forensic evidence were only able to tell the investigating
official whether the dried stain at the crime scene was
blood. Today the forensic laboratory reports contain information
about dried stains at crime scenes that can be related to
one individual. This information has been tremendously helpful
in the investigation of crimes. With the establishment of a
DNA database, physical evidence collected from the crime
scene that contains biological stains can be analyzed even
if there is no suspect. The DNA profile developed from
forensic bloodstain evidence can be compared with various
DNA databases to develop a match, which could lead to
identification of an individual.
—John C. Brenner, M.S., is a forensic
scientist, and Demetra Xythalis is a senior
lab technician. Both work at the New York
State Police Forensic Investigation Center in
Albany, New York.signal with an unusually small HYPERFINE coupling to
the copper nucleus. Both characteristics are attributed
to COORDINATION of the copper by a cysteine sulfur.
bond energy (bond dissociation energy) Atoms in a
molecule are held together by covalent bonds, and to
break these bonds atoms need bond energy. The
source of energy to break the bonds can be in the
form of heat, electricity, or mechanical means. Bond
energy is the quantity of energy that must be absorbed
to break a particular kind of chemical bond. It is
equal to the quantity of energy the bond releases
when it forms. It can also be defined as the amount of
energy necessary to break one mole of bonds of a
given kind (in gas phase).
bone imaging The construction of bone tissue images
from the radiation emitted by RADIONUCLIDES that have
been absorbed by the bone. Radionuclides such as 18F,
85Sr, and 99mTc are introduced as complexes with specific
LIGANDs (very often phosphonate ligands) and are
absorbed in the bones by metabolic activity.
See also IMAGING.
book lungs The respiratory pouches or organs of gas
exchange in spiders (arachnids), consisting of closely
packed blood-filled plates, sheets, or folds for maximum
surface aeration and contained in an internal
chamber on the underside of the abdomen. They look
like the pages of a book.
Bordet, Jules (1870–1961) Belgian Bacteriologist,
Immunologist Jules Bordet was born in Soignies, Belgium,
on June 13, 1870. He was educated in Brussels
and graduated with a doctor of medicine in 1892. Two
years later he went to Paris and began work at the Pasteur
Institute, where he worked on the destruction of
bacteria and explored red blood cells in blood serum,
contributing to the founding of serology, the study of
immune reactions in bodily fluids. In 1901 he returned
to Belgium to found the Pasteur Institute of Brabant,
Brussels, where he served until 1940. He was director
of the Belgian Institute and professor of bacteriology at
the University of Brussels (1907–35).
His work in immunology included finding two
components of blood serum responsible for bacteriolysis
(rupturing of bacterial cell walls) and the process of
hemolysis (rupturing of foreign red blood cells in blood
serum). Working with his colleague Octave Gengou,
Bordet developed several serological tests for diseases
such as typhoid fever, tuberculosis, and syphilis. The
bacteria responsible for whooping cough, Bordetella
pertussis, was named for him after he and Gengou discovered
it in 1906. In 1919, he received the Nobel
Prize in physiology and medicine for his immunological
discoveries.
He was the author of Traité de l’immunité dans
les maladies infectieuses (Treatise on immunity in infectious
diseases) and numerous medical publications.
Bordet was a permanent member of the administrative
council of Brussels University, president of the
First International Congress of Microbiology (Paris,
1930), and member of numerous scientific societies. He
died on April 6, 1961.
bottleneck effect A dramatic reduction in genetic
diversity of a population or species when the population
number is severely depleted by natural disaster, by
disease, or by changed environmental conditions. This
limits genetic diversity, since the few survivors are the
resulting genetic pool from which all future generations
are based.
Bovet, Daniels (1907–1992) Swiss Physiologist
Daniel Bovet was born in Neuchâtel, Switzerland, on
March 23, 1907, to Pierre Bovet, professor of pedagogy
at the University of Geneva, and Amy Babut. He
graduated from the University of Geneva in 1927 and
then worked on a doctorate in zoology and comparative
anatomy, which he received in 1929.
During the years 1929 until 1947 he worked at the
Pasteur Institute in Paris, starting as an assistant and
later as chief of the institute’s Laboratory of Therapeutic
Chemistry. Here he discovered the first synthetic
antihistamine, pyrilamine (meplyramine). In 1947 he
went to Rome to organize a laboratory of therapeutic
chemistry and became an Italian citizen. He became the
laboratory’s chief at the Istituto Superiore di Sanità,
Rome. Seeking a substitute for curare, a muscle relaxant,
for anesthesia, he discovered gallamine (trade
48 bond energyname Flaxedil), a neuromuscular blocking agent used
today as a muscle relaxant in the administration of
anesthesia.
He and his wife Filomena Nitti published two
important books, Structure chimique et activité pharmacodynamique
des médicaments du système nerveux
végétatif (The chemical structure and pharmacodynamic
activity of drugs of the vegetative nervous system)
in 1948 and, with G. B. Marini-Bettòlo, Curare
and Curare-like Agents (1959). In 1957 he was
awarded the Nobel Prize for physiology or medicine
for his discovery relating to synthetic compounds for
the blocking of the effects of certain substances occurring
in the body, especially in its blood vessels and
skeletal muscles.
Bovet published more than 300 papers and
received numerous awards. He served as the head of
the psychobiology and psychopharmacology laboratory
of the National Research Council (Rome) from 1969
until 1971, when he became professor of psychobiology
at the University of Rome (1971–82). He died on
April 8, 1992, in Rome.
Bowman’s capsule A cup-shaped receptacle in the
kidney that contains the glomerulus, a semipermeable
twisted mass of tiny tubes through which the blood
passes and is the primary filtering device of the
nephron, a tiny structure that produces urine during
the process of removing wastes. Each kidney is made
up of about 1 million nephrons. Blood is transported
into the Bowman’s capsule from the afferent arteriole
that branches off of the interlobular artery. The blood
is filtered out within the capsule, through the glomerulus,
and then passes out by way of the efferent arteriole.
The filtered water and aqueous wastes are passed
out of the Bowman’s capsule into the proximal convoluted
tubule, where it passes through the loop of Heinle
and into the distal convoluted tubule. Eventually the
urine passes and filters through the tiny ducts of the
calyces, the smallest part of the kidney collecting system,
where it begins to be collected and passes down
into the pelvis of the kidney before it makes its way to
the ureter and to the bladder for elimination.
brachyptery A condition where wings are disproportionately
small in relation to the body.
brain imaging In addition to MAGNETIC RESONANCE
IMAGING, which is based on the absorption by the brain
of electromagnetic radiation, brain images can be
acquired by scintillation counting (scintigraphy) of radiation
emitted from radioactive nuclei that have crossed
the blood-brain barrier. The introduction of radionuclides
into brain tissue is accomplished with the use of
specific 99mTc(V) complexes with lipophilic ligands.
See also IMAGING.
brain stem (brainstem) The oldest and inferior portion
of the brain that consists of the midbrain, pons,
reticular formation, thalamus, and medulla oblongata,
brain stem 49
Artwork combining profiles of brain and head anatomy. The brain
is seen sliced in half to show internal anatomy. The brain’s major
area, the cerebrum, includes the folded outer layer (cerebral cortex)
that produces memory, language, and conscious movement.
The central space is a brain ventricle. The brain stem, at the base
of the brain, controls subconscious functions like breathing. It
extends downwards and connects to the spinal cord in the neck.
The cerebellum (round area, at left of the brainstem) controls balance
as well as muscle coordination. The head and neck blood
vessels branch from the major chest vessels at bottom. (Courtesy
© Mehau Kulyk/Photo Researchers, Inc.)and forms a cap on the anterior end of the spinal cord.
The brain stem is the base of the brain and connects
the brain’s cerebrum to the spinal cord. It shares several
features in common with the brain of reptiles and controls
automatic and motor basic functions such as heart
rate and respiration and also is the main channel for
sensory and motor signals.
bridging ligand A bridging ligand binds to two or
more CENTRAL ATOMs, usually metals, thereby linking
them together to produce polynuclear coordination
entities. Bridging is indicated by the Greek letter µ
appearing before the ligand name and separated by a
hyphen. For an example, see FEMO-COFACTOR.
bronchiole A series of small tubes or airway passages
that branch from the larger tertiary bronchi within
each lung. At the end of the bronchiole are the
alveoli, thousands of small saclike structures that make
up the bulk of the lung and where used blood gets
reoxygenated before routing back through the heart.
See also LUNG.
Brønsted acid A molecular entity capable of donating
a hydron to a base (i.e., a “hydron donor”) or the
corresponding chemical species.
See also ACID.
Brønsted base A molecular entity capable of accepting
a hydron from an acid (i.e., a “hydron acceptor”)
or the corresponding chemical species.
See also BASE.
Brownian movement The rapid but random
motion of particles colliding with molecules of a gas or
liquid in which they are suspended.
bryophytes The mosses (Bryophyta), liverworts
(Hepatophyta), and hornworts (Anthocerophyta); a
group of small, rootless, thalloid (single cell, colony,
filament of cells, or a large branching multicellular
structure) or leafy nonvascular plants with life cycles
dominated by the gametophyte phase. These plants
inhabit the land but lack many of the terrestrial adaptations
of vascular plants, such as specialized vascular
or transporting tissues (e.g., xylem and phloem).
Terrestrial bryophytes are important for soil fixation
and humus buildup. In pioneer vegetation,
they provide a suitable habitat for seedlings of early
pioneering plants. Bryophytes are also early colonizers
after fire and contribute to nutrient cycles.
bubonic plague A bacterial disease marked by chills,
fever, and inflammatory swelling of lymphatic glands
found in rodents and humans. It is caused by Pasteurella
pestis and transmitted by the oriental rat flea. The
famous Black Death that devastated the population of
Europe and Asia in the 1300s was a form of bubonic
plague.
budding An asexual means of propagation in which a
group of self-supportive outgrowths (buds) from the
parent form and detach to live independently, or else
remain attached to eventually form extensive colonies.
The propagation of yeast is a good example of budding.
Also a type of grafting that consists of inserting a
single bud into a stock.
buffer A molecule or chemical used to control the
pH of a solution. It consists of acid and base forms and
minimizes changes in pH when extraneous acids or
bases are added to the solution. It prevents large
changes in pH by either combining with H+ or by
releasing H+ into solution.
See also PH SCALE.
bulk flow (pressure flow) Movement of water due
to a difference in pressure between two locations. The
movement of solutes in plant phloem tissue is an
example.
50 bridging ligand