The actors in the old tragedies, as we read, piped their iambics
to a tune, speaking from under a mask, and wearing stilts and a
great head-dress. 'Twas thought the dignity of the Tragic Muse
required these appurtenances, and that she was not to move
except to a measure and cadence. So Queen Medea slew her
children to a slow music: and King Agamemnon perished in a
dying fall (to use Mr. Dryden's words): the Chorus standing by
in a set attitude, and rhythmically and decorously bewailing the
fates of those great crowned persons. The Muse of History hath
encumbered herself with ceremony as well as her Sister of the
Theatre. She too wears the mask and the cothurnus, and speaks
to measure. She too, in our age, busies herself with the affairs
only of kings; waiting on them obsequiously and stately, as if she
were but a mistress of Court ceremonies, and had nothing to do
with the registering of the affairs of the common people. I have
seen in his very old age and decrepitude the old French King
Lewis the Fourteenth, the type and model of kinghood—who
never moved but to measure, who lived and died according to
the laws of his Court-marshal, persisting in enacting through life
the part of Hero; and, divested of poetry, this was but a little
wrinkled old man, pock-marked, and with a great periwig and
red heels to make him look tall—a hero for a book if you like, or
for a brass statue or a painted ceiling, a god in a Roman shape, [014]
but what more than a man for Madame Maintenon, or the barber
who shaved him, or Monsieur Fagon, his surgeon? I wonder shall
History ever pull off her periwig and cease to be court-ridden?
Shall we see something of France and England besides Versailles
and Windsor? I saw Queen Anne at the latter place tearing down
the Park slopes after her staghounds, and driving her one-horse30 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
chaise—a hot, red-faced woman, not in the least resembling that
statue of her which turns its stone back upon St. Paul's, and faces
the coaches struggling up Ludgate Hill. She was neither better
bred nor wiser than you and me, though we knelt to hand her a
letter or a washhand-basin. Why shall History go on kneeling to
the end of time? I am for having her rise up off her knees, and
take a natural posture: not to be for ever performing cringes and
congees like a Court-chamberlain, and shuffling backwards out
of doors in the presence of the sovereign. In a word, I would have
History familiar rather than heroic: and think that Mr. Hogarth
and Mr. Fielding will give our children a much better idea of the
manners of the present age in England, than the Court Gazette
and the newspapers which we get thence.
There was a German officer of Webb's, with whom we used
to joke, and of whom a story (whereof I myself was the author)
was got to be believed in the army, that he was eldest son of the
Hereditary Grand Bootjack of the Empire, and heir to that honour
of which his ancestors had been very proud, having been kicked
for twenty generations by one imperial foot, as they drew the boot
from the other. I have heard that the old Lord Castlewood, of part
of whose family these present volumes are a chronicle, though
he came of quite as good blood as the Stuarts whom he served
(and who as regards mere lineage are no better than a dozen
English and Scottish houses I could name), was prouder of his
post about the Court than of his ancestral honours and valued his
dignity (as Lord of the Butteries and Groom of the King's Posset)
so highly, that he cheerfully ruined himself for the thankless
and thriftless race who bestowed it. He pawned his plate for
King Charles the First, mortgaged his property for the same
cause, and lost the greater part of it by fines and sequestration:
stood a siege of his castle by Ireton, where his brother Thomas
capitulated (afterwards making terms with the Commonwealth,
[015] for which the elder brother never forgave him), and where his
second brother Edward, who had embraced the ecclesiastical31
profession, was slain on Castlewood tower, being engaged there
both as preacher and artilleryman. This resolute old loyalist, who
was with the king whilst his house was thus being battered down,
escaped abroad with his only son, then a boy, to return and take a
part in Worcester fight. On that fatal field Eustace Esmond was
killed, and Castlewood fled from it once more into exile, and
henceforward, and after the Restoration, never was away from
the Court of the monarch (for whose return we offer thanks in
the Prayer-book) who sold his country and who took bribes of
the French king.
What spectacle is more august than that of a great king in
exile? Who is more worthy of respect than a brave man in
misfortune? Mr. Addison has painted such a figure in his noble
piece of Cato. But suppose fugitive Cato fuddling himself at a
tavern with a wench on each knee, a dozen faithful and tipsy
companions of defeat, and a landlord calling out for his bill;
and the dignity of misfortune is straightway lost. The Historical
Muse turns away shamefaced from the vulgar scene, and closes
the door—on which the exile's unpaid drink is scored up—upon
him and his pots and his pipes, and the tavern-chorus which he
and his friends are singing. Such a man as Charles should have
had an Ostade or Mieris to paint him. Your Knellers and Le
Bruns only deal in clumsy and impossible allegories: and it hath
always seemed to me blasphemy to claim Olympus for such a
wine-drabbled divinity as that.
About the king's follower the Viscount Castlewood—orphan
of his son, ruined by his fidelity, bearing many wounds and
marks of bravery, old and in exile, his kinsmen I suppose should
be silent; nor if this patriarch fell down in his cups, call fie upon
him, and fetch passers-by to laugh at his red face and white hairs.
What! does a stream rush out of a mountain free and pure, to roll
through fair pastures, to feed and throw out bright tributaries, and
to end in a village gutter? Lives that have noble commencements
have often no better endings; it is not without a kind of awe and32 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
reverence that an observer should speculate upon such careers as
he traces the course of them. I have seen too much of success in
life to take off my hat and huzza to it as it passes in its gilt coach:
[016] and would do my little part with my neighbours on foot, that they
should not gape with too much wonder, nor applaud too loudly.
Is it the Lord Mayor going in state to mince-pies and the Mansion
House? Is it poor Jack of Newgate's procession, with the sheriff
and javelin-men, conducting him on his last journey to Tyburn?
I look into my heart and think that I am as good as my Lord
Mayor, and know I am as bad as Tyburn Jack. Give me a chain
and red gown and a pudding before me, and I could play the part
of alderman very well, and sentence Jack after dinner. Starve
me, keep me from books and honest people, educate me to love
dice, gin, and pleasure, and put me on Hounslow Heath, with a
purse before me and I will take it. “And I shall be deservedly
hanged,” say you, wishing to put an end to this prosing. I don't
say no. I can't but accept the world as I find it, including a rope's
end, as long as it is in fashion.
Chapter I. An Account Of The Family Of Esmond Of
Castlewood Hall
When Francis, fourth Viscount Castlewood, came to his title, and
presently after to take possession of his house of Castlewood,
county Hants, in the year 1691, almost the only tenant of the
place besides the domestics was a lad of twelve years of age, of
whom no one seemed to take any note until my lady viscountess
lighted upon him, going over the house, with the housekeeper on
the day of her arrival. The boy was in the room known as the
book-room, or yellow gallery, where the portraits of the family
used to hang, that fine piece among others of Sir Antonio Van
Dyck of George, second viscount, and that by Mr. Dobson of33
my lord the third viscount, just deceased, which it seems his lady
and widow did not think fit to carry away, when she sent for and
carried off to her house at Chelsey, near to London, the picture of
herself by Sir Peter Lely, in which her ladyship was represented
as a huntress of Diana's court.
The new and fair lady of Castlewood found the sad lonely
little occupant of this gallery busy over his great book, which
he laid down when he was aware that a stranger was at hand. [017]
And, knowing who that person must be, the lad stood up and
bowed before her, performing a shy obeisance to the mistress of
his house.
She stretched out her hand—indeed when was it that that hand
would not stretch out to do an act of kindness, or to protect grief
and ill-fortune? “And this is our kinsman,'” she said; “and what
is your name, kinsman?”
“My name is Henry Esmond,” said the lad, looking up at her
in a sort of delight and wonder, for she had come upon him as a
Dea certè, and appeared the most charming object he had ever
looked on. Her golden hair was shining in the gold of the sun;
her complexion was of a dazzling bloom; her lips smiling, and
her eyes beaming with a kindness which made Harry Esmond's
heart to beat with surprise.
“His name is Henry Esmond, sure enough, my lady,” says
Mrs. Worksop the housekeeper (an old tyrant whom Henry
Esmond plagued more than he hated), and the old gentlewoman
looked significantly towards the late lord's picture, as it now is in
the family, noble and severe-looking, with his hand on his sword,
and his order on his cloak, which he had from the emperor during
the war on the Danube against the Turk.
Seeing the great and undeniable likeness between this portrait
and the lad, the new viscountess, who had still hold of the
boy's hand as she looked at the picture, blushed and dropped the
hand quickly, and walked down the gallery, followed by Mrs.
Worksop.34 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
When the lady came back, Harry Esmond stood exactly in the
same spot, and with his hand as it had fallen when he dropped it
on his black coat.
Her heart melted I suppose (indeed she hath since owned as
much) at the notion that she should do anything unkind to any
mortal, great or small; for, when she returned, she had sent away
the housekeeper upon an errand by the door at the farther end of
the gallery; and, coming back to the lad, with a look of infinite
pity and tenderness in her eyes, she took his hand again, placing
her other fair hand on his head, and saying some words to him,
which were so kind and said in a voice so sweet, that the boy,
who had never looked upon so much beauty before, felt as if the
touch of a superior being or angel smote him down to the ground,
and kissed the fair protecting hand as he knelt on one knee. To
[018] the very last hour of his life, Esmond remembered the lady as
she then spoke and looked, the rings on her fair hands, the very
scent of her robe, the beam of her eyes lighting up with surprise
and kindness, her lips blooming in a smile, the sun making a
golden halo round her hair.
As the boy was yet in this attitude of humility, enters behind
him a portly gentleman, with a little girl of four years old in his
hand. The gentleman burst into a great laugh at the lady and her
adorer, with his little queer figure, his sallow face, and long black
hair. The lady blushed, and seemed to deprecate his ridicule by
a look of appeal to her husband, for it was my lord viscount who
now arrived, and whom the lad knew, having once before seen
him in the late lord's lifetime.
“So this is the little priest!” says my lord, looking down at the
lad; “welcome, kinsman.”
“He is saying his prayers to mamma,” says the little girl, who
came up to her papa's knee; and my lord burst out into another
great laugh at this, and kinsman Henry looked very silly. He
invented a half-dozen of speeches in reply, but 'twas months
afterwards when he thought of this adventure: as it was, he had35
never a word in answer.
“Le pauvre enfant, il n'a que nous,” says the lady, looking
to her lord; and the boy, who understood her, though doubtless
she thought otherwise, thanked her with all his heart for her kind
speech.
“And he shan't want for friends here,” says my lord, in a kind
voice, “shall he, little Trix?”
The little girl, whose name was Beatrix, and whom her papa
called by this diminutive, looked at Henry Esmond solemnly,
with a pair of large eyes, and then a smile shone over her face,
which was as beautiful as that of a cherub, and she came up
and put out a little hand to him. A keen and delightful pang of
gratitude, happiness, affection, filled the orphan child's heart, as
he received from the protectors, whom Heaven had sent to him,
these touching words, and tokens of friendliness and kindness.
But an hour since he had felt quite alone in the world: when
he heard the great peal of bells from Castlewood church ringing
that morning to welcome the arrival of the new lord and lady, it
had rung only terror and anxiety to him, for he knew not how
the new owner would deal with him; and those to whom he
formerly looked for protection were forgotten or dead. Pride and
doubt too had kept him within doors: when the vicar and the [019]
people of the village, and the servants of the house, had gone
out to welcome my Lord Castlewood—for Henry Esmond was
no servant, though a dependant; no relative, though he bore the
name and inherited the blood of the house; and in the midst of
the noise and acclamations attending the arrival of the new lord
(for whom you may be sure a feast was got ready, and guns
were fired, and tenants and domestics huzzaed when his carriage
approached and rolled into the courtyard of the hall), no one ever
took any notice of young Henry Esmond, who sat unobserved
and alone in the book-room, until the afternoon of that day, when
his new friends found him.
When my lord and lady were going away thence, the little36 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
girl, still holding her kinsman by the hand, bade him to come
too. “Thou wilt always forsake an old friend for a new one,
Trix,” says her father to her good-naturedly; and went into the
gallery, giving an arm to his lady. They passed thence through
the music-gallery, long since dismantled, and Queen Elizabeth's
rooms, in the clock-tower, and out into the terrace, where was
a fine prospect of sunset, and the great darkling woods with a
cloud of rooks returning; and the plain and river with Castlewood
village beyond, and purple hills beautiful to look at—and the
little heir of Castlewood, a child of two years old, was already
here on the terrace in his nurse's arms, from whom he ran across
the grass instantly he perceived his mother, and came to her.
“If thou canst not be happy here,” says my lord, looking round
at the scene, “thou art hard to please, Rachel.”
“I am happy where you are,” she said, “but we were happiest
of all at Walcote Forest.” Then my lord began to describe what
was before them to his wife, and what indeed little Harry knew
better than he—viz., the history of the house: how by yonder
gate the page ran away with the heiress of Castlewood, by which
the estate came into the present family, how the Roundheads
attacked the clock-tower, which my lord's father was slain in
defending. “I was but two years old then,” says he, “but take
forty-six from ninety, and how old shall I be, kinsman Harry?”
“Thirty,” says his wife, with a laugh.
“A great deal too old for you, Rachel,” answers my lord,
looking fondly down at her. Indeed she seemed to be a girl; and
[020] was at that time scarce twenty years old.
“You know, Frank, I will do anything to please you,” says
she, “and I promise you I will grow older every day.”
“You mustn't call papa Frank; you must call papa my lord,
now,” says Miss Beatrix, with a toss of her little head; at which
the mother smiled, and the good-natured father laughed, and the
little, trotting boy laughed, not knowing why—but because he
was happy no doubt—as every one seemed to be there. How37
those trivial incidents and words, the landscape and sunshine,
and the group of people smiling and talking, remain fixed on the
memory!
As the sun was setting, the little heir was sent in the arms of
his nurse to bed, whither he went howling; but little Trix was
promised to sit to supper that night—“and you will come too,
kinsman, won't you?” she said.
Harry Esmond blushed: “I—I have supper with Mrs.
Worksop,” says he.
“D—n it,” says my lord, “thou shalt sup with us, Harry,
to-night! Shan't refuse a lady, shall he, Trix?”—and they all
wondered at Harry's performance as a trencherman, in which
character the poor boy acquitted himself very remarkably; for the
truth is he had no dinner, nobody thinking of him in the bustle
which the house was in, during the preparations antecedent to
the new lord's arrival.
“No dinner! poor dear child!” says my lady, heaping up his
plate with meat, and my lord filling a bumper for him, bade
him call a health; on which Master Harry, crying “The King”,
tossed off the wine. My lord was ready to drink that, and most
other toasts: indeed, only too ready. He would not hear of
Doctor Tusher (the Vicar of Castlewood, who came to supper)
going away when the sweetmeats were brought: he had not
had a chaplain long enough, he said, to be tired of him: so his
reverence kept my lord company for some hours over a pipe
and a punchbowl; and went away home with rather a reeling
gait, and declaring a dozen of times, that his lordship's affability
surpassed every kindness he had ever had from his lordship's
gracious family.
As for young Esmond, when he got to his little chamber, it
was with a heart full of surprise and gratitude towards the new
friends whom this happy day had brought him. He was up and
watching long before the house was astir, longing to see that fair
lady and her children—that kind protector and patron; and only38 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
[021] fearful lest their welcome of the past night should in any way
be withdrawn or altered. But presently little Beatrix came out
into the garden, and her mother followed, who greeted Harry as
kindly as before. He told her at greater length the histories of
the house (which he had been taught in the old lord's time), and
to which she listened with great interest; and then he told her,
with respect to the night before, that he understood French, and
thanked her for her protection.
“Do you?” says she, with a blush; “then, sir, you shall teach me
and Beatrix.” And she asked him many more questions regarding
himself, which had best be told more fully and explicitly, than in
those brief replies which the lad made to his mistress's questions.
Chapter II. Relates How Francis, Fourth Viscount,
Arrives At Castlewood
'Tis known that the name of Esmond and the estate of Castlewood,
com. Hants, came into possession of the present family through
Dorothea, daughter and heiress of Edward, Earl and Marquis of
Esmond, and Lord of Castlewood, which lady married, 23 Eliz.,
Henry Poyns, gent.; the said Henry being then a page in the
household of her father. Francis, son and heir of the above Henry
and Dorothea, who took the maternal name which the family
hath borne subsequently, was made knight and baronet by King
James the First; and, being of a military disposition, remained
long in Germany with the Elector-Palatine, in whose service Sir
Francis incurred both expense and danger, lending large sums of
money to that unfortunate prince; and receiving many wounds in
the battles against the Imperialists, in which Sir Francis engaged.
On his return home Sir Francis was rewarded for his services
and many sacrifices, by his late Majesty James the First, who
graciously conferred upon this tried servant the post of Warden39
of the Butteries and Groom of the King's Posset, which high
and confidential office he filled in that king's, and his unhappy
successor's, reign.
His age, and many wounds and infirmities, obliged Sir Francis
to perform much of his duty by deputy; and his son, Sir George
Esmond, knight and banneret, first as his father's lieutenant, and [022]
afterwards as inheritor of his father's title and dignity, performed
this office during almost the whole of the reign of King Charles
the First, and his two sons who succeeded him.
Sir George Esmond married rather beneath the rank that a
person of his name and honour might aspire to, the daughter
of Thos. Topham, of the city of London, alderman and
goldsmith, who, taking the Parliamentary side in the troubles
then commencing, disappointed Sir George of the property which
he expected at the demise of his father-in-law, who devised his
money to his second daughter, Barbara, a spinster.
Sir George Esmond, on his part, was conspicuous for his
attachment and loyalty to the royal cause and person, and the
king being at Oxford in 1642, Sir George, with the consent of
his father, then very aged and infirm, and residing at his house
of Castlewood, melted the whole of the family plate for his
Majesty's service.
For this, and other sacrifices and merits, his Majesty, by
patent under the Privy Seal, dated Oxford, Jan., 1643, was
pleased to advance Sir Francis Esmond to the dignity of Viscount
Castlewood, of Shandon, in Ireland: and the viscount's estate
being much impoverished by loans to the king, which in those
troublesome times his Majesty could not repay, a grant of land
in the plantations of Virginia was given to the lord viscount; part
of which land is in possession of descendants of his family to the
present day.
The first Viscount Castlewood died full of years, and within
a few months after he had been advanced to his honours. He
was succeeded by his eldest son, the before-named George; and40 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
left issue besides, Thomas, a colonel in the king's army, that
afterwards joined the Usurper's government; and Francis, in holy
orders, who was slain whilst defending the house of Castlewood
against the Parliament, anno 1647.
George, Lord Castlewood (the second viscount) of King
Charles the First's time, had no male issue save his one
son Eustace Esmond, who was killed, with half of the
Castlewood men beside him, at Worcester fight. The lands about
Castlewood were sold and apportioned to the Commonwealth
men; Castlewood being concerned in almost all of the plots
against the Protector, after the death of the king, and up to King
[023] Charles the Second's restoration. My lord followed that king's
Court about in its exile, having ruined himself in its service. He
had but one daughter, who was of no great comfort to her father;
for misfortune had not taught those exiles sobriety of life; and
it is said that the Duke of York and his brother the king both
quarrelled about Isabel Esmond. She was maid of honour to the
Queen Henrietta Maria; she early joined the Roman Church; her
father, a weak man, following her not long after at Breda.
On the death of Eustace Esmond at Worcester, Thomas
Esmond, nephew to my Lord Castlewood, and then a stripling,
became heir to the title. His father had taken the Parliament side
in the quarrels, and so had been estranged from the chief of his
house; and my Lord Castlewood was at first so much enraged
to think that his title (albeit little more than an empty one now)
should pass to a rascally Roundhead, that he would have married
again, and indeed proposed to do so to a vintner's daughter at
Bruges, to whom his lordship owed a score for lodging when the
king was there, but for fear of the laughter of the Court, and the
anger of his daughter, of whom he stood in awe; for she was
in temper as imperious and violent as my lord, who was much
enfeebled by wounds and drinking, was weak.
Lord Castlewood would have had a match between his
daughter Isabel and her cousin, the son of that Francis Esmond41
who was killed at Castlewood siege. And the lady, it was said,
took a fancy to the young man, who was her junior by several
years (which circumstance she did not consider to be a fault
in him); but having paid his court, and being admitted to the
intimacy of the house, he suddenly flung up his suit, when it
seemed to be pretty prosperous, without giving a pretext for his
behaviour. His friends rallied him at what they laughingly chose
to call his infidelity. Jack Churchill, Frank Esmond's lieutenant
in the royal regiment of foot guards, getting the company which
Esmond vacated, when he left the Court and went to Tangier
in a rage at discovering that his promotion depended on the
complaisance of his elderly affianced bride. He and Churchill,
who had been condiscipuli at St. Paul's School, had words about
this matter; and Frank Esmond said to him with an oath, “Jack,
your sister may be so-and-so, but by Jove, my wife shan't!” and
swords were drawn, and blood drawn, too, until friends separated
them on this quarrel. Few men were so jealous about the point of
honour in those days; and gentlemen of good birth and lineage [024]
thought a royal blot was an ornament to their family coat. Frank
Esmond retired in the sulks, first to Tangier, whence he returned
after two years' service, settling on a small property he had of his
mother, near to Winchester, and became a country gentleman,
and kept a pack of beagles, and never came to Court again in King
Charles's time. But his uncle Castlewood was never reconciled
to him; nor, for some time afterwards, his cousin whom he had
refused.
By places, pensions, bounties from France, and gifts from the
king, whilst his daughter was in favour, Lord Castlewood, who
had spent in the royal service his youth and fortune, did not
retrieve the latter quite, and never cared to visit Castlewood, or
repair it, since the death of his son, but managed to keep a good
house, and figure at Court, and to save a considerable sum of
ready money.
And now, his heir and nephew, Thomas Esmond, began to42 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
bid for his uncle's favour. Thomas had served with the emperor,
and with the Dutch, when King Charles was compelled to lend
troops to the States, and against them, when his Majesty made
an alliance with the French king. In these campaigns Thomas
Esmond was more remarked for duelling, brawling, vice, and
play, than for any conspicuous gallantry in the field, and came
back to England, like many another English gentleman who has
travelled, with a character by no means improved by his foreign
experience. He had dissipated his small paternal inheritance of
a younger brother's portion, and, as truth must be told, was no
better than a hanger-on of ordinaries, and a brawler about Alsatia
and the Friars, when he bethought him of a means of mending
his fortune.
His cousin was now of more than middle age, and had
nobody's word but her own for the beauty which she said she
once possessed. She was lean, and yellow, and long in the
tooth; all the red and white in all the toy-shops in London could
not make a beauty of her—Mr. Killigrew called her the Sibyl,
the death's-head put up at the king's feast as a memento mori,
&c.—in fine, a woman who might be easy of conquest, but
whom only a very bold man would think of conquering. This
bold man was Thomas Esmond. He had a fancy to my Lord
Castlewood's savings, the amount of which rumour had very
much exaggerated. Madam Isabel was said to have royal jewels
[025] of great value; whereas poor Tom Esmond's last coat but one
was in pawn.
My lord had at this time a fine house in Lincoln's Inn Fields,
nigh to the Duke's Theatre and the Portugal ambassador's chapel.
Tom Esmond, who had frequented the one as long as he had
money to spend among the actresses, now came to the church
as assiduously. He looked so lean and shabby, that he passed
without difficulty for a repentant sinner; and so, becoming
converted, you may be sure took his uncle's priest for a director.
This charitable father reconciled him with the old lord his43
uncle, who a short time before would not speak to him, as Tom
passed under my lord's coach window, his lordship going in state
to his place at Court, while his nephew slunk by with his battered
hat and feather, and the point of his rapier sticking out of the
scabbard—to his twopenny ordinary in Bell Yard.
Thomas Esmond, after this reconciliation with his uncle, very
soon began to grow sleek, and to show signs of the benefits of
good living and clean linen. He fasted rigorously twice a week
to be sure; but he made amends on the other days: and, to show
how great his appetite was, Mr. Wycherley said, he ended by
swallowing that fly-blown rank old morsel his cousin. There
were endless jokes and lampoons about this marriage at Court:
but Tom rode thither in his uncle's coach now, called him father,
and having won could afford to laugh. This marriage took place
very shortly before King Charles died: whom the Viscount of
Castlewood speedily followed.
The issue of this marriage was one son, whom the parents
watched with an intense eagerness and care; but who, in spite
of nurses and physicians, had only a brief existence. His
tainted blood did not run very long in his poor feeble little
body. Symptoms of evil broke out early on him; and, part
from flattery, part superstition, nothing would satisfy my lord
and lady, especially the latter, but having the poor little cripple
touched by his Majesty at his church. They were ready to cry out
miracle at first (the doctors and quack-salvers being constantly
in attendance on the child, and experimenting on his poor little
body with every conceivable nostrum)—but though there seemed
from some reason a notable amelioration in the infant's health
after his Majesty touched him, in a few weeks afterward the [026]
poor thing died—causing the lampooners of the Court to say, that
the king in expelling evil out of the infant of Tom Esmond and
Isabella his wife, expelled the life out of it, which was nothing
but corruption.
The mother's natural pang at losing this poor little child44 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
must have been increased when she thought of her rival Frank
Esmond's wife, who was a favourite of the whole Court, where
my poor Lady Castlewood was neglected, and who had one child,
a daughter, flourishing and beautiful, and was about to become a
mother once more.
The Court, as I have heard, only laughed the more because the
poor lady, who had pretty well passed the age when ladies are
accustomed to have children, nevertheless determined not to give
hope up, and even when she came to live at Castlewood, was
constantly sending over to Hexton for the doctor, and announcing
to her friends the arrival of an heir. This absurdity of hers was
one amongst many others which the wags used to play upon.
Indeed, to the last days of her life, my lady viscountess had the
comfort of fancying herself beautiful, and persisted in blooming
up to the very midst of winter, painting roses on her cheeks long
after their natural season, and attiring herself like summer though
her head was covered with snow.
Gentlemen who were about the Court of King Charles and
King James, have told the present writer a number of stories
about this queer old lady, with which it's not necessary that
posterity should be entertained. She is said to have had great
powers of invective; and, if she fought with all her rivals in King
James's favour, 'tis certain she must have had a vast number of
quarrels on her hands. She was a woman of an intrepid spirit, and
it appears pursued and rather fatigued his Majesty with her rights
and her wrongs. Some say that the cause of her leaving Court
was jealousy of Frank Esmond's wife: others, that she was forced
to retreat after a great battle which took place at Whitehall,
between her ladyship and Lady Dorchester, Tom Killigrew's
daughter, whom the king delighted to honour, and in which that
ill-favoured Esther got the better of our elderly Vashti. But her
ladyship for her part always averred that it was her husband's
quarrel, and not her own, which occasioned the banishment of the
two into the country; and the cruel ingratitude of the sovereign45
in giving away, out of the family, that place of Warden of the [027]
Butteries and Groom of the King's Posset, which the two last
Lords Castlewood had held so honourably, and which was now
conferred upon a fellow of yesterday, and a hanger-on of that
odious Dorchester creature, my Lord Bergamot6; “I never,” said
my lady, “could have come to see his Majesty's posset carried by
any other hand than an Esmond. I should have dashed the salver
out of Lord Bergamot's hand, had I met him.” And those who
knew her ladyship are aware that she was a person quite capable
of performing this feat, had she not wisely kept out of the way.
Holding the purse-strings in her own control, to which, indeed,
she liked to bring most persons who came near her, Lady
Castlewood could command her husband's obedience, and so
broke up her establishment at London; she had removed from
Lincoln's Inn Fields to Chelsey, to a pretty new house she bought
there; and brought her establishment, her maids, lap-dogs, and
gentlewomen, her priest, and his lordship, her husband, to
Castlewood Hall, that she had never seen since she quitted it
as a child with her father during the troubles of King Charles
the First's reign. The walls were still open in the old house as
they had been left by the shot of the Commonwealth men. A
part of the mansion was restored and furnished up with the plate,
hangings, and furniture, brought from the house in London. My
lady meant to have a triumphal entry into Castlewood village,
and expected the people to cheer as she drove over the Green in
her great coach, my lord beside her, her gentlewomen, lap-dogs,
and cockatoos on the opposite seat, six horses to her carriage,
and servants armed and mounted, following it and preceding it.
6 Lionel Tipton, created Baron Bergamot, ann. 1686, Gentleman Usher of
the Back Stairs, and afterwards appointed Warden of the Butteries and Groom
of the King's Posset (on the decease of George, second Viscount Castlewood),
accompanied his Majesty to St. Germains, where he died without issue. No
Groom of the Posset was appointed by the Prince of Orange, nor hath there
been such an officer in any succeeding reign.46 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
But 'twas in the height of the No-Popery cry; the folks in the
village and the neighbouring town were scared by the sight of
her ladyship's painted face and eyelids, as she bobbed her head
out of the coach window, meaning no doubt to be very gracious;
[028] and one old woman said, “Lady Isabel! lord-a-mercy, it's Lady
Jezebel!” a name by which the enemies of the right honourable
viscountess were afterwards in the habit of designating her. The
country was then in a great No-Popery fervour, her ladyship's
known conversion, and her husband's, the priest in her train, and
the service performed at the chapel of Castlewood (though the
chapel had been built for that worship before any other was heard
of in the country, and though the service was performed in the
most quiet manner), got her no favour at first in the county or
village. By far the greater part of the estate of Castlewood had
been confiscated, and been parcelled out to Commonwealth men.
One or two of these old Cromwellian soldiers were still alive in
the village, and looked grimly at first upon my lady viscountess,
when she came to dwell there.
She appeared at the Hexton Assembly, bringing her lord after
her, scaring the country folks with the splendour of her diamonds,
which she always wore in public. They said she wore them in
private, too, and slept with them round her neck; though the
writer can pledge his word that this was a calumny. “If she
were to take them off,” my Lady Sark said, “Tom Esmond, her
husband, would run away with them and pawn them.” 'Twas
another calumny. My Lady Sark was also an exile from Court,
and there had been war between the two ladies before.
The village people began to be reconciled presently to their
lady, who was generous and kind, though fantastic and haughty,
in her ways; and whose praises Dr. Tusher, the vicar, sounded
loudly amongst his flock. As for my lord, he gave no great
trouble, being considered scarce more than an appendage to
my lady, who as daughter of the old lords of Castlewood, and
possessor of vast wealth, as the country folks said (though indeed47
nine-tenths of it existed but in rumour), was looked upon as the
real queen of the Castle, and mistress of all it contained.
[029]
Chapter III. Whither In The Time Of Thomas, Third
Viscount, I Had Preceded Him As Page To Isabella
Coming up to London again some short time after this retreat, the
Lord Castlewood dispatched a retainer of his to a little cottage
in the village of Ealing, near to London, where for some time
had dwelt an old French refugee, by name Mr. Pastoureau,
one of those whom the persecution of the Huguenots by the
French king had brought over to this country. With this old man
lived a little lad, who went by the name of Henry Thomas. He
remembered to have lived in another place a short time before,
near to London, too, amongst looms and spinning-wheels, and
a great deal of psalm-singing and church-going, and a whole
colony of Frenchmen.
There he had a dear, dear friend, who died and whom he called
aunt. She used to visit him in his dreams sometimes; and her
face, though it was homely, was a thousand times dearer to him
than that of Mrs. Pastoureau, Bon Papa Pastoureau's new wife,
who came to live with him after aunt went away. And there, at
Spittlefields, as it used to be called, lived Uncle George, who was
a weaver too, but used to tell Harry that he was a little gentleman,
and that his father was a captain, and his mother an angel.
When he said so, Bon Papa used to look up from the loom,
where he was embroidering beautiful silk flowers, and say,
“Angel! she belongs to the Babylonish Scarlet Woman.” Bon
Papa was always talking of the Scarlet Woman. He had a little
room where he always used to preach and sing hymns out of his
great old nose. Little Harry did not like the preaching; he liked48 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
better the fine stories which aunt used to tell him. Bon Papa's
wife never told him pretty stories; she quarrelled with Uncle
George, and he went away.
After this Harry's Bon Papa, and his wife and two children
of her own that she brought with her, came to live at Ealing.
The new wife gave her children the best of everything, and
Harry many a whipping, he knew not why. Besides blows, he
[030] got ill names from her, which need not be set down here, for
the sake of old Mr. Pastoureau, who was still kind sometimes.
The unhappiness of those days is long forgiven, though they
cast a shade of melancholy over the child's youth, which will
accompany him, no doubt, to the end of his days: as those tender
twigs are bent the trees grow afterward; and he, at least, who has
suffered as a child, and is not quite perverted in that early school
of unhappiness, learns to be gentle and long-suffering with little
children.
Harry was very glad when a gentleman dressed in black, on
horseback, with a mounted servant behind him, came to fetch
him away from Ealing. The noverca, or unjust stepmother, who
had neglected him for her own two children, gave him supper
enough the night before he went away, and plenty in the morning.
She did not beat him once, and told the children to keep their
hands off him. One was a girl, and Harry never could bear to
strike a girl; and the other was a boy, whom he could easily have
beat, but he always cried out, when Mrs. Pastoureau came sailing
to the rescue with arms like a flail. She only washed Harry's
face the day he went away; nor ever so much as once boxed his
ears. She whimpered rather when the gentleman in black came
for the boy; and old Mr. Pastoureau, as he gave the child his
blessing, scowled over his shoulder at the strange gentleman,
and grumbled out something about Babylon and the scarlet lady.
He was grown quite old, like a child almost. Mrs. Pastoureau
used to wipe his nose as she did to the children. She was a great,
big, handsome young woman; but, though she pretended to cry,49
Harry thought 'twas only a sham, and sprung quite delighted
upon the horse upon which the lackey helped him.
He was a Frenchman; his name was Blaise. The child could
talk to him in his own language perfectly well: he knew it better
than English indeed: having lived hitherto chiefly among French
people: and being called the little Frenchman by other boys on
Ealing Green. He soon learnt to speak English perfectly, and to
forget some of his French: children forget easily. Some earlier
and fainter recollections the child had, of a different country; and
a town with tall white houses; and a ship. But these were quite
indistinct in the boy's mind, as indeed the memory of Ealing soon
became, at least of much that he suffered there. [031]
The lackey before whom he rode was very lively and voluble,
and informed the boy that the gentleman riding before him was
my lord's chaplain, Father Holt—that he was now to be called
Master Harry Esmond—that my Lord Viscount Castlewood was
his parrain—that he was to live at the great house of Castlewood,
in the province of ——shire, where he would see madame the
viscountess, who was a grand lady. And so, seated on a cloth
before Blaise's saddle, Harry Esmond was brought to London,
and to a fine square called Covent Garden, near to which his
patron lodged.
Mr. Holt the priest took the child by the hand, and brought
him to this nobleman, a grand languid nobleman in a great cap
and flowered morning-gown, sucking oranges. He patted Harry
on the head and gave him an orange.
“C'est bien ça,” he said to the priest after eyeing the child, and
the gentleman in black shrugged his shoulders.
“Let Blaise take him out for a holiday,” and out for a holiday
the boy and the valet went. Harry went jumping along; he was
glad enough to go.
He will remember to his life's end the delights of those days.
He was taken to see a play by Monsieur Blaise, in a house
a thousand times greater and finer than the booth at Ealing50 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
Fair—and on the next happy day they took water on the river,
and Harry saw London Bridge, with the houses and booksellers'
shops thereon, looking like a street, and the Tower of London,
with the armour, and the great lions and bears in the moats—all
under company of Monsieur Blaise.
Presently, of an early morning, all the party set forth for the
country, namely, my lord viscount and the other gentleman;
Monsieur Blaise, and Harry on a pillion behind them, and two or
three men with pistols leading the baggage-horses. And all along
the road the Frenchman told little Harry stories of brigands, which
made the child's hair stand on end, and terrified him; so that at
the great gloomy inn on the road where they lay, he besought to
be allowed to sleep in a room with one of the servants, and was
compassionated by Mr. Holt, the gentleman who travelled with
my lord, and who gave the child a little bed in his chamber.
His artless talk and answers very likely inclined this gentleman
in the boy's favour, for next day Mr. Holt said Harry should
ride behind him, and not with the French lacky; and all along
[032] the journey put a thousand questions to the child—as to his
foster-brother and relations at Ealing; what his old grandfather
had taught him; what languages he knew; whether he could read
and write, and sing, and so forth. And Mr. Holt found that
Harry could read and write, and possessed the two languages of
French and English very well; and when he asked Harry about
singing, the lad broke out with a hymn to the tune of Dr. Martin
Luther, which set Mr. Holt a-laughing; and even caused his
grand parrain in the laced hat and periwig to laugh too when
Holt told him what the child was singing. For it appeared that
Dr. Martin Luther's hymns were not sung in the churches Mr.
Holt preached at.
“You must never sing that song any more, do you hear, little
manikin?” says my lord viscount, holding up a finger.
“But we will try and teach you a better, Harry.” Mr. Holt
said; and the child answered, for he was a docile child, and of51
an affectionate nature, “That he loved pretty songs, and would
try and learn anything the gentleman would tell him.” That day
he so pleased the gentlemen by his talk, that they had him to
dine with them at the inn, and encouraged him in his prattle; and
Monsieur Blaise, with whom he rode and dined the day before,
waited upon him now.
“'Tis well, 'tis well!” said Blaise, that night (in his own
language) when they lay again at an inn. “We are a little lord
here; we are a little lord now: we shall see what we are when we
come to Castlewood where my lady is.”
“When shall we come to Castlewood, Monsieur Blaise?” says
Harry.
“Parbleu! my lord does not press himself.” Blaise says, with
a grin; and, indeed, it seemed as if his lordship was not in a
great hurry, for he spent three days on that journey, which Harry
Esmond hath often since ridden in a dozen hours. For the last
two of the days, Harry rode with the priest, who was so kind to
him, that the child had grown to be quite fond and familiar with
him by the journey's end, and had scarce a thought in his little
heart which by that time he had not confided to his new friend.
At length on the third day, at evening, they came to a village
standing on a green with elms round it, very pretty to look at;
and the people there all took off their hats, and made curtsies to
my lord viscount, who bowed to them all languidly; and there [033]
was one portly person that wore a cassock and a broad-leafed
hat, who bowed lower than any one—and with this one both my
lord and Mr. Holt had a few words. “This, Harry, is Castlewood
church,” says Mr. Holt, “and this is the pillar thereof, learned
Doctor Tusher. Take off your hat, sirrah, and salute Doctor
Tusher.”
“Come up to supper, doctor,” says my lord; at which the
doctor made another low bow, and the party moved on towards
a grand house that was before them, with many grey towers, and
vanes on them, and windows flaming in the sunshine; and a great52 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
army of rooks, wheeling over their heads, made for the woods
behind the house, as Harry saw; and Mr. Holt told him that they
lived at Castlewood too.
They came to the house, and passed under an arch into a
courtyard, with a fountain in the centre, where many men came
and held my lord's stirrup as he descended, and paid great respect
to Mr. Holt likewise. And the child thought that the servants
looked at him curiously, and smiled to one another—and he
recalled what Blaise had said to him when they were in London,
and Harry had spoken about his godpapa, when the Frenchman
said, “Parbleu! one sees well that my lord is your godfather”;
words whereof the poor lad did not know the meaning then,
though he apprehended the truth in a very short time afterwards,
and learned it and thought of it with no small feeling of shame.
Taking Harry by the hand as soon as they were both descended
from their horses, Mr. Holt led him across the court, and under
a low door to rooms on a level with the ground; one of which
Father Holt said was to be the boy's chamber, the other on the
other side of the passage being the father's own; and as soon
as the little man's face was washed, and the father's own dress
arranged, Harry's guide took him once more to the door by which
my lord had entered the hall, and up a stair, and through an
ante-room to my lady's drawing-room—an apartment than which
Harry thought he had never seen anything more grand—no, not
in the Tower of London which he had just visited. Indeed
the chamber was richly ornamented in the manner of Queen
Elizabeth's time, with great stained windows at either end, and
[034] hangings of tapestry, which the sun shining through the coloured
glass painted of a thousand hues; and here in state, by the fire,
sat a lady to whom the priest took up Harry, who was indeed
amazed by her appearance.
My lady viscountess's face was daubed with white and red
up to the eyes, to which the paint gave an unearthly glare: she
had a tower of lace on her head, under which was a bush of53
black curls—borrowed curls—so that no wonder little Harry
Esmond was scared when he was first presented to her—the
kind priest acting as master of the ceremonies at that solemn
introduction—and he stared at her with eyes almost as great as
her own, as he had stared at the player-woman who acted the
wicked tragedy-queen, when the players came down to Ealing
Fair. She sat in a great chair by the fire-corner; in her lap was a
spaniel-dog that barked furiously; on a little table by her was her
ladyship's snuff-box and her sugar-plum box. She wore a dress of
black velvet, and a petticoat of flame-coloured brocade. She had
as many rings on her fingers as the old woman of Banbury Cross;
and pretty small feet which she was fond of showing, with great
gold clocks to her stockings, and white pantofles with red heels;
and an odour of musk was shook out of her garments whenever
she moved or quitted the room, leaning on her tortoiseshell stick,
little Fury barking at her heels.
Mrs. Tusher, the parson's wife, was with my lady. She had
been waiting-woman to her ladyship in the late lord's time, and,
having her soul in that business, took naturally to it when the
Viscountess of Castlewood returned to inhabit her father's house.
“I present to your ladyship your kinsman and little page of
honour, Master Henry Esmond,” Mr. Holt said, bowing lowly,
with a sort of comical humility. “Make a pretty bow to my lady,
monsieur; and then another little bow, not so low, to Madam
Tusher—the fair priestess of Castlewood.”
“Where I have lived and hope to die, sir,” says Madam Tusher,
giving a hard glance at the brat, and then at my lady.
Upon her the boy's whole attention was for a time directed.
He could not keep his great eyes off from her. Since the Empress
of Ealing he had seen nothing so awful.
“Does my appearance please you, little page?” asked the lady. [035]
“He would be very hard to please if it didn't,” cried Madam
Tusher.
“Have done, you silly Maria,” said Lady Castlewood.54 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
“Where I'm attached, I'm attached, madam—and I'd die rather
than not say so.”
“Je meurs où je m'attache,” Mr. Holt said, with a polite grin.
“The ivy says so in the picture, and clings to the oak like a fond
parasite as it is.”
“Parricide, sir!” cries Mrs. Tusher.
“Hush, Tusher—you are always bickering with Father Holt,”
cried my lady. “Come and kiss my hand, child,” and the oak
held out a branch to little Harry Esmond, who took and dutifully
kissed the lean old hand, upon the gnarled knuckles of which
there glittered a hundred rings.
“To kiss that hand would make many a pretty fellow happy!”
cried Mrs. Tusher: on which my lady crying out, “Go, you foolish
Tusher,” and tapping her with her great fan, Tusher ran forward
to seize her hand and kiss it. Fury arose and barked furiously at
Tusher; and Father Holt looked on at this queer scene, with arch
grave glances.
The awe exhibited by the little boy perhaps pleased the lady to
whom this artless flattery was bestowed; for having gone down
on his knee (as Father Holt had directed him, and the mode then
was) and performed his obeisance, she said, “Page Esmond, my
groom of the chamber will inform you what your duties are,
when you wait upon my lord and me; and good Father Holt will
instruct you as becomes a gentleman of our name. You will pay
him obedience in everything, and I pray you may grow to be as
learned and as good as your tutor.”
The lady seemed to have the greatest reverence for Mr. Holt,
and to be more afraid of him than of anything else in the world.
If she was ever so angry, a word or look from Father Holt made
her calm: indeed he had a vast power of subjecting those who
came near him; and, among the rest, his new pupil gave himself
up with an entire confidence and attachment to the good father,
and became his willing slave almost from the first moment he
saw him.55
He put his small hand into the father's as he walked away from
his first presentation to his mistress, and asked many questions
in his artless childish way. “Who is that other woman?” he
asked. “She is fat and round; she is more pretty than my Lady
Castlewood.” [036]
“She is Madam Tusher, the parson's wife of Castlewood. She
has a son of your age, but bigger than you.”
“Why does she like so to kiss my lady's hand? It is not good
to kiss.”
“Tastes are different, little man. Madam Tusher is attached
to my lady, having been her waiting-woman, before she was
married, in the old lord's time. She married Doctor Tusher
the chaplain. The English household divines often marry the
waiting-women.”
“You will not marry the French woman, will you? I saw her
laughing with Blaise in the buttery.”
“I belong to a church that is older and better than the English
Church,” Mr. Holt said (making a sign whereof Esmond did not
then understand the meaning, across his breast and forehead); “in
our Church the clergy do not marry. You will understand these
things better soon.”
“Was not St. Peter the head of your Church?—Dr. Rabbits of
Ealing told us so.”
The father said, “Yes, he was.”
“But St. Peter was married, for we heard only last Sunday
that his wife's mother lay sick of a fever.” On which the father
again laughed, and said he would understand this too better soon,
and talked of other things, and took away Harry Esmond, and
showed him the great old house which he had come to inhabit.
It stood on a rising green hill, with woods behind it, in which
were rooks' nests, where the birds at morning and returning home
at evening made a great cawing. At the foot of the hill was a
river with a steep ancient bridge crossing it; and beyond that a
large pleasant green flat, where the village of Castlewood stood56 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
and stands, with the church in the midst, the parsonage hard by
it, the inn with the blacksmith's forge beside it, and the sign of
the “Three Castles” on the elm. The London road stretched away
towards the rising sun, and to the west were swelling hills and
peaks, behind which many a time Harry Esmond saw the same
sun setting, that he now looks on thousands of miles away across
the great ocean—in a new Castlewood by another stream, that
bears, like the new country of wandering Aeneas, the fond names
of the land of his youth.
The Hall of Castlewood was built with two courts, whereof
one only, the fountain court, was now inhabited, the other having
[037] been battered down in the Cromwellian wars. In the fountain
court, still in good repair, was the great hall, near to the kitchen
and butteries. A dozen of living-rooms looking to the north, and
communicating with the little chapel that faced eastwards and
the buildings stretching from that to the main gate, and with the
hall (which looked to the west) into the court now dismantled.
This court had been the most magnificent of the two, until the
protector's cannon tore down one side of it before the place was
taken and stormed. The besiegers entered at the terrace under the
clock-tower, slaying every man of the garrison, and at their head
my lord's brother, Francis Esmond.
The Restoration did not bring enough money to the Lord
Castlewood to restore this ruined part of his house; where were
the morning parlours, above them the long music-gallery, and
before which stretched the garden-terrace, where, however, the
flowers grew again, which the boots of the Roundheads had
trodden in their assault, and which was restored without much
cost, and only a little care, by both ladies who succeeded the
second viscount in the government of this mansion. Round
the terrace-garden was a low wall with a wicket leading to the
wooded height beyond, that is called Cromwell's battery to this
day.
Young Harry Esmond learned the domestic part of his duty,57
which was easy enough, from the groom of her ladyship's
chamber: serving the countess, as the custom commonly was
in his boyhood, as page, waiting at her chair, bringing her
scented water and the silver basin after dinner—sitting on her
carriage step on state occasions, or on public days introducing
her company to her. This was chiefly of the Catholic gentry, of
whom there were a pretty many in the country and neighbouring
city; and who rode not seldom to Castlewood to partake of the
hospitalities there. In the second year of their residence the
company seemed especially to increase. My lord and my lady
were seldom without visitors, in whose society it was curious
to contrast the difference of behaviour between Father Holt,
the director of the family, and Doctor Tusher, the rector of the
parish—Mr. Holt moving amongst the very highest as quite their
equal, and as commanding them all; while poor Doctor Tusher,
whose position was indeed a difficult one, having been chaplain
once to the Hall, and still to the Protestant servants there, seemed
more like an usher than an equal, and always rose to go away
after the first course. [038]
Also there came in these times to Father Holt many private
visitors, whom after a little, Henry Esmond had little difficulty in
recognizing as ecclesiastics of the father's persuasion; whatever
their dresses (and they adopted all) might be. These were closeted
with the father constantly, and often came and rode away without
paying their devoirs to my lord and lady—to the lady and lord
rather—his lordship being little more than a cipher in the house,
and entirely under his domineering partner. A little fowling, a
little hunting, a great deal of sleep, and a long time at cards and
table, carried through one day after another with his lordship.
When meetings took place in this second year, which often would
happen with closed doors, the page found my lord's sheet of paper
scribbled over with dogs and horses, and 'twas said he had much
ado to keep himself awake at these councils: the countess ruling
over them, and he acting as little more than her secretary.58 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
Father Holt began speedily to be so much occupied with these
meetings as rather to neglect the education of the little lad who
so gladly put himself under the kind priest's orders. At first they
read much and regularly, both in Latin and French; the father
not neglecting in anything to impress his faith upon his pupil,
but not forcing him violently, and treating him with a delicacy
and kindness which surprised and attached the child; always
more easily won by these methods than by any severe exercise
of authority. And his delight in our walks was to tell Harry of
the glories of his order, of its martyrs and heroes, of its brethren
converting the heathen by myriads, traversing the desert, facing
the stake, ruling the courts and councils, or braving the tortures
of kings; so that Harry Esmond thought that to belong to the
Jesuits was the greatest prize of life and bravest end of ambition;
the greatest career here, and in heaven the surest reward; and
began to long for the day, not only when he should enter into the
one Church and receive his first communion, but when he might
join that wonderful brotherhood, which was present throughout
all the world, and which numbered the wisest, the bravest, the
highest born, the most eloquent of men among its members.
Father Holt bade him keep his views secret, and to hide them
as a great treasure which would escape him if it was revealed;
and proud of this confidence and secret vested in him, the lad
[039] became fondly attached to the master who initiated him into a
mystery so wonderful and awful. And when little Tom Tusher,
his neighbour, came from school for his holiday, and said how
he, too, was to be bred up for an English priest, and would get
what he called an exhibition from his school, and then a college
scholarship and fellowship, and then a good living—it tasked
young Harry Esmond's powers of reticence not to say to his
young companion, “Church! priesthood! fat living! My dear
Tommy, do you call yours a Church and a priesthood? What is a
fat living compared to converting a hundred thousand heathens
by a single sermon? What is a scholarship at Trinity by the side59
of a crown of martyrdom, with angels awaiting you as your head
is taken off? Could your master at school sail over the Thames
on his gown? Have you statues in your church that can bleed,
speak, walk, and cry? My good Tommy, in dear Father Holt's
Church these things take place every day. You know St. Philip
of the Willows appeared to Lord Castlewood and caused him to
turn to the one true Church. No saints ever come to you.” And
Harry Esmond, because of his promise to Father Holt, hiding
away these treasures of faith from T. Tusher, delivered himself of
them nevertheless simply to Father Holt, who stroked his head,
smiled at him with his inscrutable look, and told him that he did
well to meditate on these great things, and not to talk of them
except under direction.
Chapter IV. I Am Placed Under A Popish Priest And
Bred To That Religion.—Viscountess Castlewood
Had time enough been given, and his childish inclinations been
properly nurtured, Harry Esmond had been a Jesuit priest ere
he was a dozen years older, and might have finished his days a
martyr in China or a victim on Tower Hill: for, in the few months
they spent together at Castlewood, Mr. Holt obtained an entire
mastery over the boy's intellect and affections; and had brought
him to think, as indeed Father Holt thought with all his heart too,
that no life was so noble, no death so desirable, as that which [040]
many brethren of his famous order were ready to undergo. By
love, by a brightness of wit and good humour that charmed all,
by an authority which he knew how to assume, by a mystery
and silence about him which increased the child's reverence for
him, he won Harry's absolute fealty, and would have kept it,
doubtless, if schemes greater and more important than a poor
little boy's admission into orders had not called him away.60 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
After being at home for a few months in tranquillity (if theirs
might be called tranquillity, which was, in truth, a constant
bickering), my lord and lady left the country for London, taking
their director with them: and his little pupil scarce ever shed more
bitter tears in his life than he did for nights after the first parting
with his dear friend, as he lay in the lonely chamber next to that
which the father used to occupy. He and a few domestics were
left as the only tenants of the great house: and, though Harry
sedulously did all the tasks which the father set him, he had
many hours unoccupied, and read in the library, and bewildered
his little brains with the great books he found there.
After a while the little lad grew accustomed to the loneliness
of the place; and in after days remembered this part of his life as
a period not unhappy. When the family was at London the whole
of the establishment travelled thither with the exception of the
porter, who was, moreover, brewer, gardener, and woodman, and
his wife and children. These had their lodging in the gate-house
hard by, with a door into the court; and a window looking out
on the green was the chaplain's room; and next to this a small
chamber where Father Holt had his books, and Harry Esmond
his sleeping-closet. The side of the house facing the east had
escaped the guns of the Cromwellians, whose battery was on
the height facing the western court; so that this eastern end
bore few marks of demolition, save in the chapel, where the
painted windows surviving Edward the Sixth had been broke
by the Commonwealth men. In Father Holt's time little Harry
Esmond acted as his familiar, and faithful little servitor; beating
his clothes, folding his vestments, fetching his water from the
well long before daylight, ready to run anywhere for the service
of his beloved priest. When the father was away he locked his
private chamber; but the room where the books were was left to
[041] little Harry, who, but for the society of this gentleman, was little
less solitary when Lord Castlewood was at home.
The French wit saith that a hero is none to his valet de chambre,61
and it required less quick eyes than my lady's little page was
naturally endowed with, to see that she had many qualities by
no means heroic, however much Mrs. Tusher might flatter and
coax her. When Father Holt was not by, who exercised an
entire authority over the pair, my lord and my lady quarrelled
and abused each other so as to make the servants laugh, and to
frighten the little page on duty. The poor boy trembled before his
mistress, who called him by a hundred ugly names, who made
nothing of boxing his ears—and tilting the silver basin in his
face which it was his business to present to her after dinner. She
hath repaired, by subsequent kindness to him, these severities,
which it must be owned made his childhood very unhappy. She
was but unhappy herself at this time, poor soul, and I suppose
made her dependants lead her own sad life. I think my lord
was as much afraid of her as her page was, and the only person
of the household who mastered her was Mr. Holt. Harry was
only too glad when the father dined at table, and to slink away
and prattle with him afterwards, or read with him, or walk with
him. Luckily my lady viscountess did not rise till noon. Heaven
help the poor waiting-woman who had charge of her toilet! I
have often seen the poor wretch come out with red eyes from the
closet, where those long and mysterious rites of her ladyship's
dress were performed, and the backgammon-box locked up with
a rap on Mrs. Tusher's fingers when she played ill or the game
was going the wrong way.
Blessed be the king who introduced cards, and the kind
inventors of piquet and cribbage, for they employed six hours
at least of her ladyship's day, during which her family was
pretty easy. Without this occupation my lady frequently
declared she should die. Her dependants one after another
relieved guard—'twas rather a dangerous post to play with her
ladyship—and took the cards turn about. Mr. Holt would sit with
her at piquet during hours together, at which time she behaved
herself properly; and, as for Dr. Tusher, I believe he would have62 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
left a parishioner's dying bed, if summoned to play a rubber with
his patroness at Castlewood. Sometimes, when they were pretty
comfortable together, my lord took a hand. Besides these my lady
[042] had her faithful poor Tusher, and one, two, three gentlewomen
whom Harry Esmond could recollect in his time. They could not
bear that genteel service very long; one after another tried and
failed at it. These and the housekeeper, and little Harry Esmond,
had a table of their own. Poor ladies! their life was far harder
than the page's. He was found asleep tucked up in his little bed,
whilst they were sitting by her ladyship reading her to sleep, with
the News Letter or the Grand Cyrus. My lady used to have boxes
of new plays from London, and Harry was forbidden, under the
pain of a whipping, to look into them. I am afraid he deserved the
penalty pretty often, and got it sometimes. Father Holt applied
it twice or thrice, when he caught the young scapegrace with a
delightful wicked comedy of Mr. Shadwell's or Mr. Wycherley's
under his pillow.
These, when he took any, were my lord's favourite reading.
But he was averse to much study, and, as his little page fancied,
to much occupation of any sort.
It always seemed to young Harry Esmond that my lord treated
him with more kindness when his lady was not present, and Lord
Castlewood would take the lad sometimes on his little journeys
a-hunting or a-birding; he loved to play at cards and tric-trac with
him, which games the boy learned to pleasure his lord: and was
growing to like him better daily, showing a special pleasure if
Father Holt gave a good report of him, patting him on the head,
and promising that he would provide for the boy. However, in
my lady's presence, my lord showed no such marks of kindness,
and affected to treat the lad roughly, and rebuked him sharply for
little faults—for which he in a manner asked pardon of young
Esmond when they were private, saying if he did not speak
roughly, she would, and his tongue was not such a bad one as his
lady's—a point whereof the boy, young as he was, was very well63
assured.
Great public events were happening all this while, of which
the simple young page took little count. But one day, riding
into the neighbouring town on the step of my lady's coach, his
lordship and she and Father Holt being inside, a great mob of
people came hooting and jeering round the coach, bawling out,
“The bishops for ever!” “Down with the Pope!” “No Popery! no
Popery! Jezebel, Jezebel!” so that my lord began to laugh, my
lady's eyes to roll with anger, for she was as bold as a lioness, [043]
and feared nobody; whilst Mr. Holt, as Esmond saw from his
place on the step, sank back with rather an alarmed face, crying
out to her ladyship, “For God's sake, madam, do not speak or
look out of window, sit still.” But she did not obey this prudent
injunction of the father; she thrust her head out of the coach
window, and screamed out to the coachman, “Flog your way
through them, the brutes, James, and use your whip!”
The mob answered with a roaring jeer of laughter, and fresh
cries of, “Jezebel! Jezebel!” My lord only laughed the more:
he was a languid gentleman: nothing seemed to excite him
commonly, though I have seen him cheer and halloo the hounds
very briskly, and his face (which was generally very yellow and
calm) grow quite red and cheerful during a burst over the Downs
after a hare, and laugh, and swear, and huzza at a cockfight, of
which sport he was very fond. And now, when the mob began to
hoot his lady, he laughed with something of a mischievous look,
as though he expected sport, and thought that she and they were
a match.
James the coachman was more afraid of his mistress than the
mob, probably, for he whipped on his horses as he was bidden,
and the postboy that rode with the first pair (my lady always
went with her coach-and-six) gave a cut of his thong over the
shoulders of one fellow who put his hand out towards the leading
horse's rein.
It was a market day and the country people were all assembled64 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
with their baskets of poultry, eggs, and such things; the postilion
had no sooner lashed the man who would have taken hold of
his horse, but a great cabbage came whirling like a bombshell
into the carriage, at which my lord laughed more, for it knocked
my lady's fan out of her hand, and plumped into Father Holt's
stomach. Then came a shower of carrots and potatoes.
“For heaven's sake be still!” says Mr. Holt; “we are not ten
paces from the ‘Bell’ archway, where they can shut the gates on
us, and keep out this canaille.”
The little page was outside the coach on the step, and a fellow
in the crowd aimed a potato at him, and hit him in the eye, at
which the poor little wretch set up a shout; the man laughed,
a great big saddler's apprentice of the town. “Ah! you d——
[044] little yelling Popish bastard,” he said, and stooped to pick up
another; the crowd had gathered quite between the horses and in
the inn door by this time, and the coach was brought to a dead
standstill. My lord jumped as briskly as a boy out of the door on
his side of the coach, squeezing little Harry behind it; had hold
of the potato-thrower's collar in an instant, and the next moment
the brute's heels were in the air, and he fell on the stones with a
thump.
“You hulking coward!” says he; “you pack of screaming
blackguards! how dare you attack children, and insult women?
Fling another shot at that carriage, you sneaking pigskin cobbler,
and by the Lord I'll send my rapier through you!”
Some of the mob cried, “Huzza, my lord!” for they knew him,
and the saddler's man was a known bruiser, near twice as big as
my lord viscount.
“Make way, there,” says he (he spoke in a high shrill voice, but
with a great air of authority). “Make way, and let her ladyship's
carriage pass.” The men that were between the coach and the
gate of the “Bell” actually did make way, and the horses went in,
my lord walking after them with his hat on his head.
As he was going in at the gate, through which the coach had65
just rolled, another cry begins of “No Popery—no Papists!” My
lord turns round and faces them once more.
“God save the king!” says he at the highest pitch of his voice.
“Who dares abuse the king's religion? You, you d——d psalmsinging cobbler, as sure as I'm a magistrate of this county I'll
commit you!” The fellow shrunk back, and my lord retreated
with all the honours of the day. But when the little flurry caused
by the scene was over, and the flush passed off his face, he
relapsed into his usual languor, trifled with his little dog, and
yawned when my lady spoke to him.
This mob was one of many thousands that were going about
the country at that time, huzzaing for the acquittal of the seven
bishops who had been tried just then, and about whom little
Harry Esmond at that time knew scarce anything. It was assizes
at Hexton, and there was a great meeting of the gentry at the
“Bell”; and my lord's people had their new liveries on, and Harry
a little suit of blue and silver, which he wore upon occasions
of state; and the gentlefolks came round and talked to my lord;
and a judge in a red gown, who seemed a very great personage, [045]
especially complimented him and my lady, who was mighty
grand. Harry remembers her train borne up by her gentlewoman.
There was an assembly and ball at the great room at the “Bell”,
and other young gentlemen of the county families looked on as
he did. One of them jeered him for his black eye, which was
swelled by the potato, and another called him a bastard, on which
he and Harry fell to fisticuffs. My lord's cousin, Colonel Esmond
of Walcote, was there, and separated the two lads, a great tall
gentleman with a handsome, good-natured face. The boy did
not know how nearly in after-life he should be allied to Colonel
Esmond, and how much kindness he should have to owe him.
There was little love between the two families. My lady used
not to spare Colonel Esmond in talking of him, for reasons which
have been hinted already; but about which, at his tender age,
Henry Esmond could be expected to know nothing.66 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
Very soon afterwards my lord and lady went to London with
Mr. Holt, leaving, however, the page behind them. The little
man had the great house of Castlewood to himself; or between
him and the housekeeper, Mrs. Worksop, an old lady who was a
kinswoman of the family in some distant way, and a Protestant,
but a stanch Tory and king's-man, as all the Esmonds were.
He used to go to school to Dr. Tusher when he was at home,
though the doctor was much occupied too. There was a great
stir and commotion everywhere, even in the little quiet village of
Castlewood, whither a party of people came from the town, who
would have broken Castlewood Chapel windows, but the village
people turned out, and even old Sievewright, the republican
blacksmith, along with them: for my lady, though she was a
Papist, and had many odd ways, was kind to the tenantry, and
there was always a plenty of beef, and blankets, and medicine
for the poor at Castlewood Hall.
A kingdom was changing hands whilst my lord and lady were
away. King James was flying, the Dutchmen were coming;
awful stories about them and the Prince of Orange used old Mrs.
Worksop to tell to the idle little page.
He liked the solitude of the great house very well; he had
all the play-books to read, and no Father Holt to whip him,
and a hundred childish pursuits and pastimes, without doors and
within, which made this time very pleasant.
[046]
Chapter V. My Superiors Are Engaged In Plots For
The Restoration Of King James II
Not having been able to sleep, for thinking of some lines for eels
which he had placed the night before, the lad was lying in his
little bed, waiting for the hour when the gate would be open, and67
he and his comrade, Job Lockwood, the porter's son, might go to
the pond and see what fortune had brought them. At daybreak
Job was to awaken him, but his own eagerness for the sport had
served as a réveille long since—so long, that it seemed to him as
if the day never would come.
It might have been four o'clock when he heard the door of
the opposite chamber, the chaplain's room, open, and the voice
of a man coughing in the passage. Harry jumped up, thinking
for certain it was a robber, or hoping perhaps for a ghost, and,
flinging open his own door, saw before him the chaplain's door
open, and a light inside, and a figure standing in the doorway, in
the midst of a great smoke which issued from the room.
“Who's there?” cried out the boy, who was of a good spirit.
“Silentium!” whispered the other; “'tis I, my boy!” and, holding
his hand out, Harry had no difficulty in recognizing his master
and friend, Father Holt. A curtain was over the window of the
chaplain's room that looked to the court, and Harry saw that the
smoke came from a great flame of papers which were burning
in a brazier when he entered the chaplain's room. After giving a
hasty greeting and blessing to the lad, who was charmed to see
his tutor, the father continued the burning of his papers, drawing
them from a cupboard over the mantelpiece wall, which Harry
had never seen before.
Father Holt laughed, seeing the lad's attention fixed at once
on this hole. “That is right, Harry,” he said; “faithful little famuli
see all and say nothing. You are faithful, I know.”
“I know I would go to the stake for you,” said Harry. [047]
“I don't want your head,” said the father, patting it kindly; “all
you have to do is to hold your tongue. Let us burn these papers,
and say nothing to anybody. Should you like to read them?”
Harry Esmond blushed, and held down his head; he had
looked as the fact was, and without thinking, at the paper before
him; and though he had seen it, could not understand a word of it,
the letters being quite clear enough, but quite without meaning.68 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
They burned the papers, beating down the ashes in a brazier, so
that scarce any traces of them remained.
Harry had been accustomed to see Father Holt in more
dresses than one; it not being safe, or worth the danger, for
Popish ecclesiastics to wear their proper dress; and he was, in
consequence, in no wise astonished that the priest should now
appear before him in a riding dress, with large buff leather boots,
and a feather to his hat, plain, but such as gentlemen wore.
“You know the secret of the cupboard,” said he, laughing,
“and must be prepared for other mysteries;” and he opened—but
not a secret cupboard this time—only a wardrobe, which he
usually kept locked, and from which he now took out two or
three dresses and perukes of different colours, and a couple of
swords of a pretty make (Father Holt was an expert practitioner
with the small sword, and every day, whilst he was at home, he
and his pupil practised this exercise, in which the lad became a
very great proficient), a military coat and cloak, and a farmer's
smock, and placed them in the large hole over the mantelpiece
from which the papers had been taken.
“If they miss the cupboard,” he said, “they will not find these;
if they find them, they'll tell no tales, except that Father Holt
wore more suits of clothes than one. All Jesuits do. You know
what deceivers we are, Harry.”
Harry was alarmed at the notion that his friend was about to
leave him; but “No”, the priest said; “I may very likely come
back with my lord in a few days. We are to be tolerated; we
are not to be persecuted. But they may take a fancy to pay a
visit at Castlewood ere our return; and, as gentlemen of my cloth
are suspected, they might choose to examine my papers, which
concern nobody—at least, not them.” And to this day, whether
the papers in cipher related to politics, or to the affairs of that
[048] mysterious society whereof Father Holt was a member, his pupil,
Harry Esmond, remains in entire ignorance.
The rest of his goods, his small wardrobe, &c., Holt left69
untouched on his shelves and in his cupboard, taking down—with
a laugh, however—and flinging into the brazier, where he only
half burned them, some theological treatises which he had been
writing against the English divines. “And now,” said he, “Henry,
my son, you may testify, with a safe conscience, that you saw
me burning Latin sermons the last time I was here before I went
away to London; and it will be daybreak directly, and I must be
away before Lockwood is stirring.”
“Will not Lockwood let you out, sir?” Esmond asked. Holt
laughed; he was never more gay or good-humoured than when
in the midst of action or danger.
“Lockwood knows nothing of my being here, mind you,” he
said; “nor would you, you little wretch, had you slept better. You
must forget that I have been here; and now farewell. Close the
door, and go to your own room, and don't come out till—stay,
why should you not know one secret more? I know you will
never betray me.”
In the chaplain's room were two windows; the one looking
into the court facing westwards to the fountain; the other, a small
casement strongly barred, and looking on to the green in front of
the Hall. This window was too high to reach from the ground;
but, mounting on a buffet which stood beneath it, Father Holt
showed me how, by pressing on the base of the window, the
whole framework of lead, glass, and iron stanchions, descended
into a cavity worked below, from which it could be drawn and
restored to its usual place from without; a broken pane being
purposely open to admit the hand which was to work upon the
spring of the machine.
“When I am gone,” Father Holt said, “you may push away
the buffet, so that no one may fancy that an exit has been made
that way; lock the door; place the key—where shall we put the
key?—under Chrysostom on the book-shelf; and if any ask for it,
say I keep it there, and told you where to find it, if you had need
to go to my room. The descent is easy down the wall into the70 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
ditch; and so, once more farewell, until I see thee again, my dear
son.” And with this the intrepid father mounted the buffet with
[049] great agility and briskness, stepped across the window, lifting
up the bars and framework again from the other side, and only
leaving room for Harry Esmond to stand on tiptoe and kiss his
hand before the casement closed, the bars fixing as firm as ever
seemingly in the stone arch overhead. When Father Holt next
arrived at Castlewood, it was by the public gate on horseback;
and he never so much as alluded to the existence of the private
issue to Harry, except when he had need of a private messenger
from within, for which end, no doubt, he had instructed his young
pupil in the means of quitting the Hall.
Esmond, young as he was, would have died sooner than betray
his friend and master, as Mr. Holt well knew; for he had tried
the boy more than once, putting temptations in his way, to
see whether he would yield to them and confess afterwards, or
whether he would resist them, as he did sometimes, or whether
he would lie, which he never did. Holt instructing the boy on this
point, however, that if to keep silence is not to lie, as it certainly
is not, yet silence is, after all, equivalent to a negation—and
therefore a downright No, in the interest of justice or your friend,
and in reply to a question that may be prejudicial to either, is not
criminal, but, on the contrary, praiseworthy; and as lawful a way
as the other of eluding a wrongful demand. For instance (says
he), suppose a good citizen, who had seen his Majesty take refuge
there, had been asked, “Is King Charles up that oak-tree?” His
duty would have been not to say, Yes—so that the Cromwellians
should seize the king and murder him like his father—but No;
his Majesty being private in the tree, and therefore not to be seen
there by loyal eyes: all which instruction, in religion and morals,
as well as in the rudiments of the tongues and sciences, the boy
took eagerly and with gratitude from his tutor. When, then, Holt
was gone, and told Harry not to see him, it was as if he had never
been. And he had this answer pat when he came to be questioned71
a few days after.
The Prince of Orange was then at Salisbury, as young Esmond
learned from seeing Doctor Tusher in his best cassock (though
the roads were muddy, and he never was known to wear his silk,
only his stuff one, a-horseback), with a great orange cockade in
his broad-leafed hat, and Nahum, his clerk, ornamented with a
like decoration. The doctor was walking up and down, in front of
his parsonage, when little Esmond saw him, and heard him say
he was going to pay his duty to his highness the prince, as he [050]
mounted his pad and rode away with Nahum behind. The village
people had orange cockades too, and his friend the blacksmith's
laughing daughter pinned one into Harry's old hat, which he tore
out indignantly when they bid him to cry, “God save the Prince of
Orange and the Protestant religion!” but the people only laughed,
for they liked the boy in the village, where his solitary condition
moved the general pity, and where he found friendly welcomes
and faces in many houses. Father Holt had many friends there
too, for he not only would fight the blacksmith at theology, never
losing his temper, but laughing the whole time in his pleasant
way, but he cured him of an ague with quinquina, and was always
ready with a kind word for any man that asked it, so that they
said in the village 'twas a pity the two were Papists.
The director and the Vicar of Castlewood agreed very well;
indeed, the former was a perfectly bred gentleman, and it was
the latter's business to agree with everybody. Doctor Tusher and
the lady's maid, his spouse, had a boy who was about the age
of little Esmond; and there was such a friendship between the
lads, as propinquity and tolerable kindness and good humour on
either side would be pretty sure to occasion. Tom Tusher was
sent off early however to a school in London, whither his father
took him and a volume of sermons in the first year of the reign
of King James; and Tom returned but once, a year afterwards,
to Castlewood for many years of his scholastic and collegiate
life. Thus there was less danger to Tom of a perversion of his72 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
faith by the director, who scarce ever saw him, than there was to
Harry, who constantly was in the vicar's company; but as long as
Harry's religion was his Majesty's, and my lord's, and my lady's,
the doctor said gravely, it should not be for him to disturb or
disquiet him: it was far from him to say that his Majesty's Church
was not a branch of the Catholic Church; upon which Father Holt
used, according to his custom, to laugh and say, that the Holy
Church throughout all the world, and the noble army of martyrs,
were very much obliged to the doctor.
It was while Dr. Tusher was away at Salisbury that there
came a troop of dragoons with orange scarfs, and quartered in
Castlewood, and some of them came up to the Hall, where they
[051] took possession, robbing nothing however beyond the hen-house
and the beer-cellar; and only insisting upon going through the
house and looking for papers. The first room they asked to look
at was Father Holt's room, of which Harry Esmond brought the
key, and they opened the drawers and the cupboards, and tossed
over the papers and clothes—but found nothing except his books
and clothes, and the vestments in a box by themselves, with
which the dragoons made merry, to Harry Esmond's horror. And
to the questions which the gentleman put to Harry, he replied,
that Father Holt was a very kind man to him, and a very learned
man, and Harry supposed would tell him none of his secrets if he
had any. He was about eleven years old at this time, and looked
as innocent as boys of his age.
The family were away more than six months, and when they
returned they were in the deepest state of dejection, for King
James had been banished, the Prince of Orange was on the
throne, and the direst persecutions of those of the Catholic faith
were apprehended by my lady, who said she did not believe that
there was a word of truth in the promises of toleration that Dutch
monster made, or in a single word the perjured wretch said. My
lord and lady were in a manner prisoners in their own house; so
her ladyship gave the little page to know, who was by this time73
growing of an age to understand what was passing about him,
and something of the characters of the people he lived with.
“We are prisoners,” says she; “in everything but chains, we
are prisoners. Let them come, let them consign me to dungeons,
or strike off my head from this poor little throat” (and she clasped
it in her long fingers). “The blood of the Esmonds will always
flow freely for their kings. We are not like the Churchills—the
Judases, who kiss their master and betray him. We know how to
suffer, how even to forgive in the royal cause” (no doubt it was
to that fatal business of losing the place of Groom of the Posset
to which her ladyship alluded, as she did half a dozen times in
the day). “Let the tyrant of Orange bring his rack and his odious
Dutch tortures—the beast! the wretch! I spit upon him and defy
him. Cheerfully will I lay this head upon the block; cheerfully
will I accompany my lord to the scaffold: we will cry, ‘God save
King James!’ with our dying breath, and smile in the face of the
executioner.” And she told her page a hundred times at least [052]
of the particulars of the last interview which she had with his
Majesty.
“I flung myself before my liege's feet,” she said, “at Salisbury.
I devoted myself—my husband—my house, to his cause. Perhaps
he remembered old times, when Isabella Esmond was young and
fair; perhaps he recalled the day when 'twas not I that knelt—at
least he spoke to me with a voice that reminded me of days gone
by. ‘Egad!’ said his Majesty, ‘you should go to the Prince of
Orange, if you want anything.’ ‘No, sire,’ I replied, ‘I would
not kneel to a usurper; the Esmond that would have served your
Majesty will never be groom to a traitor's posset.’ The royal
exile smiled, even in the midst of his misfortune; he deigned to
raise me with words of consolation. The viscount, my husband,
himself, could not be angry at the august salute with which he
honoured me!”
The public misfortune had the effect of making my lord and his
lady better friends than they ever had been since their courtship.74 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
My lord viscount had shown both loyalty and spirit, when these
were rare qualities in the dispirited party about the king; and the
praise he got elevated him not a little in his wife's good opinion,
and perhaps in his own. He wakened up from the listless and
supine life which he had been leading; was always riding to and
fro in consultation with this friend or that of the king's; the page
of course knowing little of his doings, but remarking only his
greater cheerfulness and altered demeanour.
Father Holt came to the Hall constantly, but officiated no
longer openly as chaplain; he was always fetching and carrying:
strangers, military and ecclesiastic (Harry knew the latter though
they came in all sorts of disguises), were continually arriving
and departing. My lord made long absences and sudden
reappearances, using sometimes the means of exit which Father
Holt had employed, though how often the little window in the
chaplain's room let in or let out my lord and his friends, Harry
could not tell. He stoutly kept his promise to the father of not
prying, and if at midnight from his little room he heard noises
of persons stirring in the next chamber, he turned round to the
wall and hid his curiosity under his pillow until it fell asleep.
Of course he could not help remarking that the priest's journeys
were constant, and understanding by a hundred signs that some
[053] active though secret business employed him: what this was may
pretty well be guessed by what soon happened to my lord.
No garrison or watch was put into Castlewood when my lord
came back, but a guard was in the village; and one or other of
them was always on the Green keeping a look-out on our great
gate, and those who went out and in. Lockwood said that at night
especially every person who came in or went out was watched
by the outlying sentries. 'Twas lucky that we had a gate which
their worships knew nothing about. My lord and Father Holt
must have made constant journeys at night: once or twice little
Harry acted as their messenger and discreet little aide de camp.
He remembers he was bidden to go into the village with his75
fishing-rod, enter certain houses, ask for a drink of water, and
tell the good man, “There would be a horse-market at Newbury
next Thursday,” and so carry the same message on to the next
house on his list.
He did not know what the message meant at the time, nor
what was happening: which may as well, however, for clearness'
sake, be explained here. The Prince of Orange being gone to
Ireland, where the king was ready to meet him with a great army,
it was determined that a great rising of his Majesty's party should
take place in this country: and my lord was to head the force
in our county. Of late he had taken a greater lead in affairs
than before, having the indefatigable Mr. Holt at his elbow,
and my lady viscountess strongly urging him on; and my Lord
Sark being in the Tower a prisoner, and Sir Wilmot Crawley,
of Queen's Crawley, having gone over to the Prince of Orange's
side—my lord became the most considerable person in our part
of the county for the affairs of the king.
It was arranged that the regiment of Scots Greys and Dragoons,
then quartered at Newbury, should declare for the king on a
certain day, when likewise the gentry affected to his Majesty's
cause were to come in with their tenants and adherents to
Newbury, march upon the Dutch troops at Reading under
Ginckel; and, these overthrown, and their indomitable little
master away in Ireland, 'twas thought that our side might move
on London itself, and a confident victory was predicted for the
king.
As these great matters were in agitation, my lord lost his
listless manner and seemed to gain health; my lady did not scold
him, Mr. Holt came to and fro, busy always; and little Harry [054]
longed to have been a few inches taller, that he might draw a
sword in this good cause.
One day, it must have been about the month of July, 1690, my
lord, in a great horseman's coat, under which Harry could see the
shining of a steel breastplate he had on, called little Harry to him,76 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
put the hair off the child's forehead, and kissed him, and bade
God bless him in such an affectionate way as he never had used
before. Father Holt blessed him too, and then they took leave
of my lady viscountess, who came from her apartment with a
pocket-handkerchief to her eyes, and her gentlewoman and Mrs.
Tusher supporting her.
“You are going to—to ride,” says she. “Oh, that I might come
too!—but in my situation I am forbidden horse exercise.”
“We kiss my lady marchioness's hand,” says Mr. Holt.
“My lord, God speed you!” she said, stepping up and
embracing my lord in a grand manner. “Mr. Holt, I ask
your blessing:” and she knelt down for that, whilst Mrs. Tusher
tossed her head up.
Mr. Holt gave the same benediction to the little page, who went
down and held my lord's stirrups for him to mount; there were
two servants waiting there too—and they rode out of Castlewood
gate.
As they crossed the bridge Harry could see an officer in scarlet
ride up touching his hat, and address my lord.
The party stopped, and came to some parley or discussion,
which presently ended, my lord putting his horse into a canter
after taking off his hat and making a bow to the officer who
rode alongside him step for step: the trooper accompanying him,
falling back, and riding with my lord's two men. They cantered
over the Green, and behind the elms (my lord waving his hand,
Harry thought), and so they disappeared.
That evening we had a great panic, the cow-boy coming
at milking-time riding one of our horses, which he had found
grazing at the outer park wall.
All night my lady viscountess was in a very quiet and subdued
mood. She scarce found fault with anybody; she played at cards
for six hours; little page Esmond went to sleep. He prayed for
my lord and the good cause before closing his eyes.77
It was quite in the grey of the morning when the porter's
bell rang, and old Lockwood waking up, let in one of my [055]
lord's servants, who had gone with him in the morning, and who
returned with a melancholy story.
The officer who rode up to my lord had, it appeared, said to
him, that it was his duty to inform his lordship that he was not
under arrest, but under surveillance, and to request him not to
ride abroad that day.
My lord replied that riding was good for his health, that if the
captain chose to accompany him he was welcome, and it was
then that he made a bow, and they cantered away together.
When he came on to Wansey Down, my lord all of a sudden
pulled up, and the party came to a halt at the crossway.
“Sir” says he to the officer, “we are four to two; will you be
so kind as to take that road, and leave me to go mine?”
“Your road is mine, my lord,” says the officer.
“Then,” says my lord, but he had no time to say more, for the
officer, drawing a pistol, snapped it at his lordship; as at the same
moment Father Holt, drawing a pistol, shot the officer through
the head.
It was done, and the man dead in an instant of time. The
orderly, gazing at the officer, looked scared for a moment, and
galloped away for his life.
“Fire! fire!” cries out Father Holt, sending another shot after
the trooper, but the two servants were too much surprised to use
their pieces, and my lord calling to them to hold their hands, the
fellow got away.
“Mr. Holt, qui pensoit à tout,” says Blaise, “gets off his
horse, examines the pockets of the dead officer for papers,
gives his money to us two, and says, ‘The wine is drawn,
monsieur le marquis,’—why did he say marquis to monsieur le
vicomte?—‘we must drink it.’
“The poor gentleman's horse was a better one than that I rode,”
Blaise continues; “Mr. Holt bids me get on him, and so I gave78 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
a cut to Whitefoot, and she trotted home. We rode on towards
Newbury; we heard firing towards midday: at two o'clock a
horseman comes up to us as we were giving our cattle water at
an inn—and says, All is done. The Ecossois declared an hour too
soon—General Ginckel was down upon them. The whole thing
was at an end.
“ ‘And we've shot an officer on duty, and let his orderly
[056] escape,’ says my lord.
“ ‘Blaise,’ says Mr. Holt, writing two lines on his table-book,
one for my lady, and one for you, Master Harry; ‘you must go
back to Castlewood, and deliver these,’ and behold me.”
And he gave Harry the two papers. He read that to himself,
which only said, “Burn the papers in the cupboard, burn this.
You know nothing about anything.” Harry read this, ran upstairs
to his mistress's apartment, where her gentlewoman slept near to
the door, made her bring a light and wake my lady, into whose
hands he gave the paper. She was a wonderful object to look at
in her night attire, nor had Harry ever seen the like.
As soon as she had the paper in her hand, Harry stepped
back to the chaplain's room, opened the secret cupboard over the
fireplace, burned all the papers in it, and, as he had seen the priest
do before, took down one of his reverence's manuscript sermons,
and half burnt that in the brazier. By the time the papers were
quite destroyed it was daylight. Harry ran back to his mistress
again. Her gentlewoman ushered him again into her ladyship's
chamber; she told him (from behind her nuptial curtains) to bid
the coach be got ready, and that she would ride away anon.
But the mysteries of her ladyship's toilet were as awfully long
on this day as on any other, and, long after the coach was ready,
my lady was still attiring herself. And just as the viscountess
stepped forth from her room, ready for departure, young Job
Lockwood comes running up from the village with news that a
lawyer, three officers, and twenty or four-and-twenty soldiers,
were marching thence upon the house. Job had but two minutes79
the start of them, and, ere he had well told his story, the troop
rode into our courtyard.
[057]
Chapter VI. The Issue Of The Plots.—The Death Of
Thomas, Third Viscount Of Castlewood; And The
Imprisonment Of His Viscountess
At first my lady was for dying like Mary, Queen of Scots (to whom
she fancied she bore a resemblance in beauty), and, stroking her
scraggy neck, said, “They will find Isabel of Castlewood is
equal to her fate.” Her gentlewoman, Victoire, persuaded her
that her prudent course was, as she could not fly, to receive the
troops as though she suspected nothing, and that her chamber
was the best place wherein to await them. So her black japan
casket which Harry was to carry to the coach was taken back to
her ladyship's chamber, whither the maid and mistress retired.
Victoire came out presently, bidding the page to say her ladyship
was ill, confined to her bed with the rheumatism.
By this time the soldiers had reached Castlewood. Harry
Esmond saw them from the window of the tapestry parlour;
a couple of sentinels were posted at the gate—a half-dozen
more walked towards the stable; and some others, preceded by
their commander, and a man in black, a lawyer probably, were
conducted by one of the servants to the stair leading up to the
part of the house which my lord and lady inhabited.
So the captain, a handsome kind man, and the lawyer, came
through the ante-room to the tapestry parlour, and where now
was nobody but young Harry Esmond, the page.
“Tell your mistress, little man,” says the captain kindly, “that
we must speak to her.”
“My mistress is ill abed,” said the page.80 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
“What complaint has she?” asked the captain.
The boy said, “the rheumatism!”
“Rheumatism! that's a sad complaint,” continues the goodnatured captain; “and the coach is in the yard to fetch the doctor,
I suppose?”
“I don't know,” says the boy.
“And how long has her ladyship been ill?”
“I don't know,” says the boy.
“When did my lord go away?”
[058] “Yesterday night.”
“With Father Holt?”
“With Mr. Holt.”
“And which way did they travel?” asks the lawyer.
“They travelled without me,” says the page.
“We must see Lady Castlewood.”
“I have orders that nobody goes in to her ladyship—she is
sick,” says the page; but at this moment Victoire came out.
“Hush!” says she; and, as if not knowing that any one was near,
“What's this noise?” says she. “Is this gentleman the doctor?”
“Stuff! we must see Lady Castlewood,” says the lawyer,
pushing by.
The curtains of her ladyship's room were down, and the
chamber dark, and she was in bed with a nightcap on her head,
and propped up by her pillows, looking none the less ghastly
because of the red which was still on her cheeks, and which she
could not afford to forgo.
“Is that the doctor?” she said.
“There is no use with this deception, madam,” Captain
Westbury said (for so he was named). “My duty is to arrest the
person of Thomas, Viscount Castlewood, a nonjuring peer—of
Robert Tusher, Vicar of Castlewood—and Henry Holt, known
under various other names and designations, a Jesuit priest, who
officiated as chaplain here in the late king's time, and is now at
the head of the conspiracy which was about to break out in this81
country against the authority of their Majesties King William and
Queen Mary—and my orders are to search the house for such
papers or traces of the conspiracy as may be found here. Your
ladyship will please to give me your keys, and it will be as well
for yourself that you should help us, in every way, in our search.”
“You see, sir, that I have the rheumatism, and cannot move,”
said the lady, looking uncommonly ghastly as she sat up in her
bed, where however she had had her cheeks painted, and a new
cap put on, so that she might at least look her best when the
officers came.
“I shall take leave to place a sentinel in the chamber, so that
your ladyship, in case you should wish to rise, may have an arm
to lean on,” Captain Westbury said. “Your woman will show
me where I am to look;” and Madame Victoire, chattering in her
half-French and half-English jargon, opened while the captain
examined one drawer after another; but, as Harry Esmond
thought, rather carelessly, with a smile on his face, as if he was [059]
only conducting the examination for form's sake.
Before one of the cupboards Victoire flung herself down,
stretching out her arms, and, with a piercing shriek, cried, “Non,
jamais, monsieur l'officier! Jamais! I will rather die than let you
see this wardrobe.”
But Captain Westbury would open it, still with a smile on his
face, which, when the box was opened, turned into a fair burst of
laughter. It contained—not papers regarding the conspiracy—but
my lady's wigs, washes, and rouge-pots, and Victoire said men
were monsters, as the captain went on with his perquisition. He
tapped the back to see whether or no it was hollow, and as he
thrust his hands into the cupboard, my lady from her bed called
out with a voice that did not sound like that of a very sick
woman, “Is it your commission to insult ladies as well as to arrest
gentlemen, captain?”
“These articles are only dangerous when worn by your
ladyship,” the captain said with a low bow, and a mock grin82 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
of politeness. “I have found nothing which concerns the
Government as yet—only the weapons with which beauty is
authorized to kill,” says he, pointing to a wig with his sword-tip.
“We must now proceed to search the rest of the house.”
“You are not going to leave that wretch in the room with me,”
cried my lady, pointing to the soldier.
“What can I do, madam? Somebody you must have to smooth
your pillow and bring your medicine—permit me——”
“Sir!” screamed out my lady—
“Madam, if you are too ill to leave the bed,” the captain then
said, rather sternly, “I must have in four of my men to lift you off
in the sheet: I must examine this bed, in a word; papers may be
hidden in a bed as elsewhere; we know that very well and——”
Here it was her ladyship's turn to shriek, for the captain, with
his fist shaking the pillows and bolsters, at last came to “burn”,
as they say in the play of forfeits, and wrenching away one of
the pillows, said, “Look, did not I tell you so? Here is a pillow
stuffed with paper.”
“Some villain has betrayed us,” cried out my lady, sitting up
[060] in the bed, showing herself full dressed under her night-rail.
“And now your ladyship can move, I am sure; permit me to
give you my hand to rise. You will have to travel for some
distance, as far as Hexton Castle to-night. Will you have your
coach? Your woman shall attend you if you like—and the
japan-box?”
“Sir! you don't strike a man when he is down,” said my lady,
with some dignity: “can you not spare a woman?”
“Your ladyship must please to rise and let me search the bed,”
said the captain; “there is no more time to lose in bandying talk.”
And, without more ado, the gaunt old woman got up. Harry
Esmond recollected to the end of his life that figure, with the
brocade dress and the white night-rail, and the gold-clocked
red stockings, and white red-heeled shoes sitting up in the bed,
and stepping down from it. The trunks were ready packed83
for departure in her ante-room, and the horses ready harnessed
in the stable: about all which the captain seemed to know,
by information got from some quarter or other; and, whence,
Esmond could make a pretty shrewd guess in after-times, when
Dr. Tusher complained that King William's Government had
basely treated him for services done in that cause.
And here he may relate, though he was then too young to
know all that was happening, what the papers contained, of
which Captain Westbury had made a seizure, and which papers
had been transferred from the japan-box to the bed when the
officers arrived.
There was a list, of gentlemen of the county in Father Holt's
handwriting—Mr. Freeman's (King James's) friends—a similar
paper being found among those of Sir John Fenwick and Mr.
Coplestone, who suffered death for this conspiracy.
There was a patent conferring the title of Marquis of Esmond
on my Lord Castlewood, and the heirs male of his body; his
appointment as lord lieutenant of the county, and major-general.7 [061]
There were various letters from the nobility and gentry, some
ardent and some doubtful, in the king's service; and (very luckily
for him) two letters concerning Colonel Francis Esmond; one
from Father Holt, which said, “I have been to see this colonel at
his house at Walcote near to Wells, where he resides since the
king's departure, and pressed him very eagerly in Mr. Freeman's
cause, showing him the great advantage he would have by trading
with that merchant, offering him large premiums there as agreed
between us. But he says no: he considers Mr. Freeman the head
7 To have this rank of marquis restored in the family had always been my
lady viscountess's ambition; and her old maiden aunt, Barbara Topham, the
goldsmith's daughter, dying about this time, and leaving all her property to
Lady Castlewood, I have heard that her ladyship sent almost the whole of the
money to King James, a proceeding which so irritated my Lord Castlewood that
he actually went to the parish church, and was only appeased by the marquis's
title which his exiled majesty sent to him in return for the 15,000l. his faithful
subject lent him.84 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
of the firm, will never trade against him or embark with any
other trading company, but considers his duty was done when
Mr. Freeman left England. This colonel seems to care more for
his wife and his beagles than for affairs. He asked me much
about young H. E., ‘that bastard,’ as he called him: doubting my
lord's intentions respecting him. I reassured him on this head,
stating what I knew of the lad, and our intentions respecting him,
but with regard to Freeman he was inflexible.”
And another letter was from Colonel Esmond to his kinsman,
to say that one Captain Holton had been with him offering him
large bribes to join, you know who, and saying that the head
of the house of Castlewood was deeply engaged in that quarter.
But for his part he had broke his sword when the K. left the
country, and would never again fight in that quarrel. The P. of
O. was a man, at least, of a noble courage, and his duty and, as
he thought, every Englishman's, was to keep the country quiet,
and the French out of it: and, in fine, that he would have nothing
to do with the scheme.
Of the existence of these two letters and the contents of
the pillow, Colonel Frank Esmond, who became Viscount
Castlewood, told Henry Esmond afterwards, when the letters
were shown to his lordship, who congratulated himself, as he
had good reason, that he had not joined in the scheme which
proved so fatal to many concerned in it. But, naturally, the lad
knew little about these circumstances when they happened under
his eyes: only being aware that his patron and his mistress were
in some trouble, which had caused the flight of the one, and the
[062] apprehension of the other by the officers of King William.
The seizure of the papers effected, the gentlemen did not
pursue their further search through Castlewood house very
rigorously. They examined Mr. Holt's room, being led thither
by his pupil, who showed, as the father had bidden him, the
place where the key of his chamber lay, opened the door for the
gentlemen, and conducted them into the room.85
When the gentlemen came to the half-burned papers in the
brazier, they examined them eagerly enough, and their young
guide was a little amused at their perplexity.
“What are these?” says one.
“They're written in a foreign language,” says the lawyer.
“What are you laughing at, little whelp?” adds he, turning round
as he saw the boy smile.
“Mr. Holt said they were sermons,” Harry said, “and bade me
to burn them;” which indeed was true of those papers.
“Sermons, indeed—it's treason, I would lay a wager,” cries
the lawyer.
“Egad! it's Greek to me,” says Captain Westbury. “Can you
read it, little boy?”
“Yes, sir, a little,” Harry said.
“Then read, and read in English, sir, on your peril,” said the
lawyer. And Harry began to translate:—
“Hath not one of your own writers said, ‘The children of
Adam are now labouring as much as he himself ever did, about
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, shaking the boughs
thereof, and seeking the fruit, being for the most part unmindful
of the tree of life.’ O blind generation! 'tis this tree of knowledge
to which the serpent has led you”—and here the boy was obliged
to stop, the rest of the page being charred by the fire: and asked
of the lawyer—“Shall I go on, sir?”
The lawyer said—“This boy is deeper than he seems: who
knows that he is not laughing at us?”
“Let's have in Dick the Scholar,” cried Captain Westbury,
laughing; and he called to a trooper out of the window—“Ho,
Dick, come in here and construe.”
A thick-set soldier, with a square good-humoured face, came
in at the summons, saluting his officer.
“Tell us what is this, Dick,” says the lawyer.86 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
“My name is Steele, sir,” says the soldier. “I may be Dick for
my friends, but I don't name gentlemen of your cloth amongst
[063] them.”
“Well then, Steele.”
“Mr. Steele, sir, if you please. When you address a gentleman
of his Majesty's Horse Guards, be pleased not to be so familiar.”
“I didn't know, sir,” said the lawyer.
“How should you? I take it you are not accustomed to meet
with gentlemen,” says the trooper.
“Hold thy prate, and read that bit of paper,” says Westbury.
“'Tis Latin,” says Dick, glancing at it, and again saluting
his officer, “and from a sermon of Mr. Cudworth's,” and he
translated the words pretty much as Henry Esmond had rendered
them.
“What a young scholar you are,” says the captain to the boy.
“Depend on't, he knows more than he tells,” says the lawyer.
“I think we will pack him off in the coach with old Jezebel.”
“For construing a bit of Latin?” said the captain very goodnaturedly.
“I would as lief go there as anywhere,” Harry Esmond said,
simply, “for there is nobody to care for me.”
There must have been something touching in the child's voice,
or in this description of his solitude—for the captain looked at
him very good-naturedly, and the trooper, called Steele, put his
hand kindly on the lad's head, and said some words in the Latin
tongue.
“What does he say?” says the lawyer.
“Faith, ask Dick himself,” cried Captain Westbury.
“I said I was not ignorant of misfortune myself, and had
learned to succour the miserable, and that's not your trade, Mr.
Sheepskin,” said the trooper.
“You had better leave Dick the Scholar alone, Mr. Corbet,” the
captain said. And Harry Esmond, always touched by a kind face
and kind word, felt very grateful to this good-natured champion.87
The horses were by this time harnessed to the coach; and the
countess and Victoire came down and were put into the vehicle.
This woman, who quarrelled with Harry Esmond all day, was
melted at parting with him, and called him “dear angel”, and
“poor infant”, and a hundred other names.
The viscountess, giving him her lean hand to kiss, bade him
always be faithful to the house of Esmond. “If evil should [064]
happen to my lord,” says she, “his successor I trust will be found,
and give you protection. Situated as I am, they will not dare
wreak their vengeance on me now.” And she kissed a medal she
wore with great fervour, and Henry Esmond knew not in the least
what her meaning was; but hath since learned that, old as she
was, she was for ever expecting, by the good offices of saints
and relics, to have an heir to the title of Esmond.
Harry Esmond was too young to have been introduced into the
secrets of politics in which his patrons were implicated; for they
put but few questions to the boy (who was little of stature, and
looked much younger than his age), and such questions as they
put he answered cautiously enough, and professing even more
ignorance than he had, for which his examiners willingly enough
gave him credit. He did not say a word about the window or the
cupboard over the fireplace; and these secrets quite escaped the
eyes of the searchers.
So then my lady was consigned to her coach, and sent off
to Hexton, with her woman and the man of law to bear her
company, a couple of troopers riding on either side of the coach.
And Harry was left behind at the Hall, belonging as it were to
nobody, and quite alone in the world. The captain and a guard
of men remained in possession there; and the soldiers, who were
very good-natured and kind, ate my lord's mutton and drank his
wine, and made themselves comfortable, as they well might do,
in such pleasant quarters.
The captains had their dinner served in my lord's tapestry
parlour, and poor little Harry thought his duty was to wait upon88 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
Captain Westbury's chair, as his custom had been to serve his
lord when he sat there.
After the departure of the countess, Dick the Scholar took
Harry Esmond under his special protection, and would examine
him in his humanities, and talk to him both of French and Latin,
in which tongues the lad found, and his new friend was willing
enough to acknowledge, that he was even more proficient than
Scholar Dick. Hearing that he had learned them from a Jesuit,
in the praise of whom and whose goodness Harry was never
tired of speaking, Dick, rather to the boy's surprise, who began
to have an early shrewdness, like many children bred up alone,
showed a great deal of theological science, and knowledge of the
[065] points at issue between the two Churches; so that he and Harry
would have hours of controversy together, in which the boy was
certainly worsted by the arguments of this singular trooper. “I
am no common soldier,” Dick would say, and indeed it was easy
to see by his learning, breeding, and many accomplishments,
that he was not. “I am of one of the most ancient families in
the Empire; I have had my education at a famous school, and a
famous university; I learned my first rudiments of Latin near to
Smithfield, in London, where the martyrs were roasted.”
“You hanged as many of ours,” interposed Harry; “and, for
the matter of persecution, Father Holt told me that a young
gentleman of Edinburgh, eighteen years of age, student at the
college there, was hanged for heresy only last year, though he
recanted, and solemnly asked pardon for his errors.”
“Faith! there has been too much persecution on both sides:
but 'twas you taught us.”
“Nay, 'twas the pagans began it,” cried the lad, and began to
instance a number of saints of the Church, from the Protomartyr
downwards—“this one's fire went out under him: that one's oil
cooled in the cauldron: at a third holy head the executioner
chopped three times and it would not come off. Show us martyrs
in your Church for whom such miracles have been done.”89
“Nay,” says the trooper gravely, “the miracles of the first three
centuries belong to my Church as well as yours, Master Papist,”
and then added, with something of a smile upon his countenance,
and a queer look at Harry—“And yet, my little catechizer, I have
sometimes thought about those miracles, that there was not much
good in them, since the victim's head always finished by coming
off at the third or fourth chop, and the cauldron, if it did not boil
one day, boiled the next. Howbeit, in our times, the Church has
lost that questionable advantage of respites. There never was a
shower to put out Ridley's fire, nor an angel to turn the edge of
Campion's axe. The rack tore the limbs of Southwell the Jesuit and
Sympson the Protestant alike. For faith, everywhere multitudes
die willingly enough. I have read in Monsieur Rycaut's History
of the Turks, of thousands of Mahomet's followers rushing upon
death in battle as upon certain Paradise; and in the Great Mogul's
dominions people fling themselves by hundreds under the cars [066]
of the idols annually, and the widows burn themselves on their
husbands' bodies, as 'tis well known. 'Tis not the dying for a faith
that's so hard, Master Harry—every man of every nation has
done that—'tis the living up to it that is difficult, as I know to my
cost,” he added, with a sigh. “And ah!” he added, “my poor lad,
I am not strong enough to convince thee by my life—though to
die for my religion would give me the greatest of joys—but I had
a dear friend in Magdalen College in Oxford; I wish Joe Addison
were here to convince thee, as he quickly could—for I think he's
a match for the whole College of Jesuits; and what's more, in his
life too. In that very sermon of Dr. Cudworth's which your priest
was quoting from, and which suffered martyrdom in the brazier,”
Dick added, with a smile, “I had a thought of wearing the black
coat (but was ashamed of my life you see, and took to this
sorry red one)—I have often thought of Joe Addison—Doctor
Cudworth says, ‘A good conscience is the best looking-glass of
Heaven’—and there's a serenity in my friend's face which always
reflects it—I wish you could see him, Harry.”90 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
“Did he do you a great deal of good?” asked the lad, simply.
“He might have done,” said the other—“at least he taught me
to see and approve better things. 'Tis my own fault, deteriora
sequi.”
“You seem very good,” the boy said.
“I'm not what I seem, alas!” answered the trooper—and
indeed, as it turned out, poor Dick told the truth—for that very
night, at supper in the hall, where the gentlemen of the troop
took their repasts, and passed most part of their days dicing
and smoking of tobacco, and singing and cursing, over the
Castlewood ale—Harry Esmond found Dick the Scholar in a
woful state of drunkenness. He hiccuped out a sermon; and his
laughing companions bade him sing a hymn, on which Dick,
swearing he would run the scoundrel through the body who
insulted his religion, made for his sword, which was hanging on
the wall, and fell down flat on the floor under it, saying to Harry,
who ran forward to help him, “Ah, little Papist, I wish Joseph
Addison was here!”
Though the troopers of the king's Life Guards were all
[067] gentlemen, yet the rest of the gentlemen seemed ignorant
and vulgar boors to Harry Esmond, with the exception of this
good-natured Corporal Steele the Scholar, and Captain Westbury
and Lieutenant Trant, who were always kind to the lad. They
remained for some weeks or months encamped in Castlewood,
and Harry learned from them, from time to time, how the lady at
Hexton Castle was treated, and the particulars of her confinement
there. 'Tis known that King William was disposed to deal very
leniently with the gentry who remained faithful to the old king's
cause; and no prince usurping a crown, as his enemies said he
did (righteously taking it as I think now), ever caused less blood
to be shed. As for women-conspirators, he kept spies on the least
dangerous, and locked up the others. Lady Castlewood had the
best rooms in Hexton Castle, and the gaoler's garden to walk
in; and though she repeatedly desired to be led out to execution,91
like Mary Queen of Scots, there never was any thought of taking
her painted old head off, or any desire to do aught but keep her
person in security.
And it appeared she found that some were friends in her
misfortune, whom she had, in her prosperity, considered as
her worst enemies. Colonel Francis Esmond, my lord's cousin
and her ladyship's, who had married the Dean of Winchester's
daughter, and, since King James's departure out of England,
had lived not very far away from Hexton town, hearing of
his kinswoman's strait, and being friends with Colonel Brice,
commanding for King William in Hexton, and with the Church
dignitaries there, came to visit her ladyship in prison, offering
to his uncle's daughter any friendly services which lay in his
power. And he brought his lady and little daughter to see the
prisoner, to the latter of whom, a child of great beauty, and
many winning ways, the old viscountess took not a little liking,
although between her ladyship and the child's mother there was
little more love than formerly. There are some injuries which
women never forgive one another; and Madam Francis Esmond,
in marrying her cousin, had done one of those irretrievable
wrongs to Lady Castlewood. But as she was now humiliated, and
in misfortune, Madam Francis could allow a truce to her enmity,
and could be kind for a while, at least, to her husband's discarded
mistress. So the little Beatrix, her daughter, was permitted often
to go and visit the imprisoned viscountess, who, in so far as the
child and its father were concerned, got to abate in her anger [068]
towards that branch of the Castlewood family. And the letters
of Colonel Esmond coming to light, as has been said, and his
conduct being known to the king's council, the colonel was put in
a better position with the existing Government than he had ever
before been; any suspicions regarding his loyalty were entirely
done away; and so he was enabled to be of more service to his
kinswoman than he could otherwise have been.
And now there befell an event by which this lady recovered92 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
her liberty, and the house of Castlewood got a new owner, and
fatherless little Harry Esmond a new and most kind protector
and friend. Whatever that secret was which Harry was to hear
from my lord, the boy never heard it; for that night when Father
Holt arrived, and carried my lord away with him, was the last
on which Harry ever saw his patron. What happened to my
lord may be briefly told here. Having found the horses at the
place where they were lying, my lord and Father Holt rode
together to Chatteris, where they had temporary refuge with one
of the father's penitents in that city; but the pursuit being hot for
them, and the reward for the apprehension of one or the other
considerable, it was deemed advisable that they should separate;
and the priest betook himself to other places of retreat known
to him, whilst my lord passed over from Bristol into Ireland,
in which kingdom King James had a Court and an army. My
lord was but a small addition to this; bringing, indeed, only his
sword and the few pieces in his pocket; but the king received him
with some kindness and distinction in spite of his poor plight,
confirmed him in his new title of marquis, gave him a regiment,
and promised him further promotion. But titles or promotion
were not to benefit him now. My lord was wounded at the fatal
battle of the Boyne, flying from which field (long after his master
had set him an example), he lay for a while concealed in the
marshy country near to the town of Trim, and more from catarrh
and fever caught in the bogs than from the steel of the enemy in
the battle, sank and died. May the earth lie light upon Thomas of
Castlewood! He who writes this must speak in charity, though
this lord did him and his two grievous wrongs: for one of these
he would have made amends, perhaps, had life been spared him;
[069] but the other lay beyond his power to repair, though 'tis to be
hoped that a greater Power than a priest has absolved him of it.
He got the comfort of this absolution, too, such as it was: a priest
of Trim writing a letter to my lady to inform her of this calamity.
But in those days letters were slow of travelling, and our93
priest's took two months or more on its journey from Ireland to
England: where, when it did arrive, it did not find my lady at her
own house; she was at the king's house of Hexton Castle when
the letter came to Castlewood, but it was opened for all that by
the officer in command there.
Harry Esmond well remembered the receipt of this letter,
which Lockwood brought in as Captain Westbury and Lieutenant
Trant were on the green playing at bowls, young Esmond looking
on at the sport, or reading his book in the arbour.
“Here's news for Frank Esmond,” says Captain Westbury;
“Harry, did you ever see Colonel Esmond?” And Captain
Westbury looked very hard at the boy as he spoke.
Harry said he had seen him but once when he was at Hexton,
at the ball there.
“And did he say anything?”
“He said what I don't care to repeat,” Harry answered. For he
was now twelve years of age: he knew what his birth was and
the disgrace of it; and he felt no love towards the man who had
most likely stained his mother's honour and his own.
“Did you love my Lord Castlewood?”
“I wait until I know my mother, sir, to say,” the boy answered,
his eyes filling with tears.
“Something has happened to Lord Castlewood,” Captain
Westbury said, in a vary grave tone—“something which must
happen to us all. He is dead of a wound received at the Boyne,
fighting for King James.”
“I am glad my lord fought for the right cause,” the boy said.
“It was better to meet death on the field like a man, than
face it on Tower Hill, as some of them may,” continued Mr.
Westbury. “I hope he has made some testament, or provided for
thee somehow. This letter says, he recommends unicum filium
suum dilectissimum to his lady. I hope he has left you more than
that.”
Harry did not know, he said. He was in the hands of Heaven [070]94 Henry Esmond; The English Humourists; The Four Georges
and Fate; but more lonely now, as it seemed to him, than he had
been all the rest of his life; and that night, as he lay in his little
room which he still occupied, the boy thought with many a pang
of shame and grief of his strange and solitary condition:—how
he had a father and no father; a nameless mother that had been
brought to ruin, perhaps, by that very father whom Harry could
only acknowledge in secret and with a blush, and whom he could
neither love nor revere. And he sickened to think how Father
Holt, a stranger, and two or three soldiers, his acquaintances of
the last six weeks, were the only friends he had in the great wide
world, where he was now quite alone. The soul of the boy was
full of love, and he longed as he lay in the darkness there for
some one upon whom he could bestow it. He remembers, and
must to his dying day, the thoughts and tears of that long night,
the hours tolling through it. Who was he and what? Why here
rather than elsewhere? I have a mind, he thought, to go to that
priest at Trim, and find out what my father said to him on his
death-bed confession. Is there any child in the whole world so
unprotected as I am? Shall I get up and quit this place, and run to
Ireland? With these thoughts and tears the lad passed that night
away until he wept himself to sleep.
The next day, the gentlemen of the guard who had heard
what had befallen him were more than usually kind to the child,
especially his friend Scholar Dick, who told him about his own
father's death, which had happened when Dick was a child at
Dublin, not quite five years of age. “That was the first sensation
of grief,” Dick said, “I ever knew. I remember I went into the
room where his body lay, and my mother sat weeping beside it. I
had my battledore in my hand, and fell a-beating the coffin, and
calling papa; on which my mother caught me in her arms, and
told me in a flood of tears papa could not hear me, and would play
with me no more, for they were going to put him under ground,
whence he could never come to us again. And this,” said Dick
kindly, “has made me pity all children ever since;