 John of Northampton being Mayor, took the popular view. He did not exactly make over the
provisioning of the City to the Corporation, but he first obtained an Act of Parliament throwing open the
calling of fishmonger to all comers; and then another which practically abolished the trade of grocers,
pepperers, fruiterers, butchers, and bakers. Imagine the rage with which such an Act would now be received
by London tradesmen!
The next Mayor, however, obtained the rescinding of these Acts. In consequence, fish went up in price and
there was a popular tumult, upon which one man was hanged and John of Northampton was sent to the Castle
of Tintagel on the Cornish Coast, where he remained for the rest of his life.
32. WHITTINGTON.
PART III.
In the year 1384, being then about twenty-six years of age, Whittington was elected a member of the Common
Council. In the year 1389 he was assessed at the same sum as the richest citizen. So that these ten years of his
life were evidently very prosperous. In the year 1393 he was made Alderman for Broad Street Ward. In the
same year he was made Sheriff. In the year 1396, the Mayor, Adam Bamme, dying in office, Whittington
succeeded him. The following year he was elected Mayor.
In the year 1401, water was brought from Tyburn (now the N.E. corner of Hyde Park) to Cornhill in pipes, a
great and important boon to the City.
In the year 1406 he was again elected Mayor. The manner of his election is described in the contemporary
records. After service in the chapel of the Guildhall, the outgoing Mayor, with all the Aldermen and as many
as possible of the wealthier and more substantial Commoners of the City, met in the Guildhall and chose two
of their number, viz., Richard Whittington and Drew Barentyn. Then the Mayor receiving this nomination
retired into a closed chamber with the Aldermen and made choice of Whittington.
In the year 1419 he was elected Mayor for the third and last time, but, counting his succession to Bamme, he
was actually four times Mayor. In 1416 he was returned Member of Parliament for the City.
It was not a new thing for a citizen to be made Mayor more than once. Three during the reign of Edward III.
were Mayor four times; two, three times; seven, twice.
In Whittington's later years began the burning of heretics and Lollards. It is certain that Lollardism had some
hold in the City, but one knows not how great was the hold. A priest, William Sawtre, was the first who
suffered. Two men of the lower class followed. There is nothing to show that Whittington ever swerved from
orthodox opinions.
In 1416, the City was first lighted at night: all citizens were ordered to hang lanterns over their doors. How far
the order was obeyed, especially in the poorer parts of the City, is not known.
In 1407 a plague carried off 30,000 persons in London alone. If this number is correctly stated it must have
taken half the population.
The History of London, by Walter Besant 46
Many improvements were effected in the City during these years: it is reasonable to suppose that Whittington
had a hand in bringing these about. Fresh water brought in pipes: lights hung out after dark: the erection of a
house--Bakewell Hall--for the storage and sale of broadcloth: the erection of a store for the reception of grain,
in case of famine--this was the beginning of Leadenhall--the building of a new Guildhall: and an attempt to
reform the prisons--an attempt which failed.
In his last year of office Whittington entertained the King, Henry V. and his Queen.
There was as yet no Mansion House: every Mayor made use of his own private house.
The magnificence of the entertainment amazed the King. Even the fires were fed with cedar and perfumed
wood. When the Queen spoke of this costly gift the Mayor proposed to feed the fire with something more
precious still. He then produced the King's bonds to the value of 60,000l. which he threw into the fire and
burned. This great sum would be a very considerable gift even now. In that time it represented at least six
times its present value. The Mayor therefore gave the King the sum of 360,000l.
This is, very shortly, an account of Whittington's public life.
He lived, I believe, on the north side of St. Michael's Paternoster Royal. I think so because his College was
established there after his death, and as he had no children it is reasonable to suppose that his house would be
assigned to the College. There is nothing to show what kind of house it was, but we may rest assured that the
man who could entertain the King and Queen in such a manner was at least well housed. There is a little court
on this spot which is, I believe, on the site of Whittington's house. They used to show a house in Hart Street as
Whittington's, but there was no ground for the tradition except that it was a very old house.
Whittington married his master's daughter, Alice Fitzwarren. He had no children, and he died in 1423 when he
was sixty-five years of age.
Such was the real Whittington. A gentleman by birth, a rich and successful man, happy in his private life, a
great stickler for justice, as a magistrate severe upon those who cheat and adulterate, a loyal and patriotic man,
and always filled with the desire to promote the interests of the City which had received him and made him
rich.
33. GIFTS AND BEQUESTS.
The stream of charity which has so largely enriched and endowed the City of London began very early. You
have seen how Rahere built and endowed Bartholomew's, and how Queen Maud founded the Lazar House of
St. Giles. The fourteenth century furnishes many more instances. Thus William Elsinge founded in 1332 a
hospital for a hundred poor blind men: in 1371 John Barnes gave a chest containing 1,000 marks to be lent by
the City to young men beginning trade. You have heard how one Mayor went out to fight a pirate and slew
him and made prizes of his vessels. Another when corn was very dear imported at his own expense a great
quantity from Germany. Another gave money to relieve poor prisoners: another left money for the help of
poor householders: another provided that on his commemoration day in the year 2,400 poor householders, of
the City should have a dinner and every man two pence. This means in present money about £600 a year, or
an estate worth £20,000: another left money to pay the tax called the Fifteenth, for three parishes: another
brought water in a conduit from Highbury to Cripplegate.
But the greatest and wisest benefactor of his time was Whittington. In his own words: 'The fervent desire and
busy intention of a prudent, wise, and devout man, should be to cast before and make secure the state and the
end of this short life with deeds of mercy and pity, and especially to provide for those miserable persons
whom the penury of poverty insulteth, and to whom the power of seeking the necessaries of life by act or
bodily labour is interdicted.'
The History of London, by Walter Besant 47
With these grave words, which should be a lesson to all men, rich or poor, Whittington begins the foundation
of his College. If a man were in these days to found a College he would make it either a school for boys or a
technical school--in any case a place which should be always working for the world. In those days, when it
was universally believed that the saying of masses was able to lift souls out of punishment, a man founded a
College which should pray for the world. Whittington's College was to consist of a Master and four
Fellows--who were to be Masters of Arts--with clerks, choristers, and servants. They were every day to say
mass for the souls of Richard and Alice Whittington in the church of St. Michael's Paternoster Royal--which
church Whittington himself had rebuilt. Behind the church he founded and built an almshouse for thirteen
poor men, who were to have 16d. each per week, about 7s. of our money, with clothing and rooms on the
condition of praying daily for their founder and his wife. Part of the ground for the building was granted by
the Mayor and Corporation.
The College continued until the Dissolution of the Religious Houses--that is, for one hundred and fifty years:
the almshouse continues to this day: but it has been removed to Highgate: on its site the Mercers' Company
has established a school.
Whittington, further, built a library for the Franciscan House; part of the building still remains at Christ's
Hospital. It was 129 feet long and 31 feet broad. He also gave the friars 400l. to buy books. He restored and
repaired the Hospital of St. Bartholomew's, to which he gave a library. He paved and glazed the new building
of Guildhall: he gave large sums for the bridge--and the chapel on the bridge--at Rochester--as a merchant he
was greatly interested in keeping this important bridge in order: he repaired Gloucester Cathedral--the
cathedral church of his native diocese: he made 'bosses,' i.e. taps of water, to the great aqueduct: he rebuilt and
enlarged Newgate Prison; and he founded a library at Guildhall.
Many of these things were done after his death by his executors.
Such were the gifts by which a City merchant of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries sought to advance the
prosperity of the citizens. Fresh water in plenty by 'bosses' here and there: the light of learning by means of
libraries: almshouses for the poor: mercy and charity for the prisoners: hospitals for the sick: help for the
young: prayers for the dead. These things he understood.
We cannot expect any man to be greatly in advance of his age. Otherwise we should find a Whittington
insisting upon cleanliness of streets: fresh air in the house: burial outside the City: the abolition of the long
fasts which made people eat stinking fish and so gave them leprosy: the education of the craftsmen in
something besides their trade: the establishment of a patrol by police: and the freedom of trade.
He did not found any school. That is a remarkable omission. One of his successors, Sir William Sevenoke,
founded a school for lads of his native town Sevenoaks: another, Sir Robert Chichele, founded a school, an
almshouse, and a college in his native town of Higham Ferrers. A friend of his own, Sir John Niel, proposed
to establish four new grammar schools in the City. And yet Whittington left no money for a school. We may
be quite sure that there was a reason for the omission. Perhaps he was afraid of the growing spirit of doubt and
inquiry. Boys who learn grammar and rhetoric may grow into men who question and argue; and so, easily and
naturally, get bound to the stake and are consumed with the pile of faggots. Everything was provided except a
school for boys. Libraries for men; but not a school for boys. The City of London School was founded by
Whittington's executor, John Carpenter. There must have been reasons in Whittington's mind for omitting any
endowment of schools. What those reasons were I cannot even guess.
34. THE PALACES AND GREAT HOUSES.
When you think of a great city of the thirteenth or fourteenth century you must remember two things. First,
that the streets were mostly very narrow--if you walk down Thames Street and note the streets running north
and south you will be able to understand how narrow the City streets were. Second, that the great houses of
The History of London, by Walter Besant 48
the nobles and the rich merchants stood in these narrow streets, shut in on all sides though they often
contained spacious courts and gardens. No attempt was made to group the houses or to arrange them with any
view to picturesque effect.
It has been the fashion to speak of mediæval London as if it were a city of hovels grouped together along dark
and foul lanes. This was by no means the case. On the contrary, it was a city of splendid palaces and houses
nearly all of which were destroyed by the Great Fire. You have seen how the City was covered with
magnificent buildings of monasteries and churches. Do not believe that the nobles and rich merchants who
endowed and built these places would be content to live in hovels.
[Illustration: DURHAM, SALISBURY, AND WORCESTER HOUSES.]
The nobles indeed wanted barracks. A great Lord never moved anywhere without his following. The Earl of
Warwick, called the King Maker, when he rode into London was followed by five hundred men, wearing his
colours: all of these had to find accommodation in his town house. This was always built in the form of a
court or quadrangle. The modern Somerset House, which is built on the foundations of the old house, shows
us what a great man's house was like: and the College of Heralds in Queen Victoria Street, is another
illustration, for this was Lord Derby's town house. Hampton Court and St. James's, are illustrations of a great
house with more than one court. Any one who knows the colleges of Oxford and Cambridge will understand
the arrangement of the great noble's town house in the reign of Richard II. On one side was the hall in which
the banquets took place and all affairs of importance were discussed. The kitchen, butteries and cellars stood
opposite the doors of the hall; at the back of the hall with a private entrance were the rooms of the owner and
his family: the rest of the rooms on the quadrangle were given up to the use of his followers.
Baynard's Castle--the name yet survives--stood on the river bank not far from Blackfriars. It was a huge house
with towers and turrets and a water gate with stairs. It contained two courts. It was at last, after standing for
six hundred years, destroyed in the Great Fire, and was one of the most lamentable of the losses caused by that
disaster. The house had been twice before burned down, and that which finally perished was built in 1428.
Here Edward IV. assumed the Crown: here he placed his wife and children for safety before going forth to the
Battle of Barnet. Here Buckingham offered the Crown to Richard. Here Henry VIII. lived. Here Charles II.
was entertained.
Eastward, also on the river bank and near the old Swan Stairs, stood another great house called Cold Harbour.
It belonged to Holland, Dukes of Exeter, to Richard III. and to Margaret, Countess of Richmond.
North of Thames Street near College Hill was the Erber, another great house which belonged successively to
the Scropes and the Nevilles. Here lived the King-maker Earl of Warwick. His following was so numerous
that every day six oxen were consumed for breakfast alone. His son-in-law, who had the house afterwards,
was the Duke of Clarence--'false, fleeting, perjured Clarence.'
If you would know how a great merchant of the fifteenth century loved to be housed, go visit Crosby Hall. It
is the only specimen left of the ancient wealth and splendour of a City merchant. But as one man lived so did
many. We cannot believe that Crosby was singular in his building a palace for himself.
London with its narrow streets, its crowded courts, and the corners where the huts and hovels of wood and
daub and thatch stood among their foul surroundings, a constant danger to the great houses of fire and plague,
was a city of great houses and palaces, with which no other city in Europe could compare. Venice and Genoa
had their Crosby Halls--their merchants' palaces; but London had in addition, the town houses of all the
nobles of the land. In the City alone, without counting the Strand and Westminster, there were houses of the
Earls of Arundel, Northumberland, Worcester, Berkeley, Oxford, Essex, Thanet, Suffolk, Richmond,
Pembroke, Abergavenny, Warwick, Leicester, Westmoreland. Then there were the houses of the Bishops and
the Abbots. All these before we come to the houses of the rich merchants. Let your vision of London under
The History of London, by Walter Besant 49
the Plantagenets be that of a city all spires and towers, great churches and stately convents, with noble houses
as great and splendid as Crosby Hall scattered all about the City within the walls and lining the river bank
from Ludgate to Westminster.
35. AMUSEMENTS.
We have heard so much of the religious Houses, Companies, Hospitals, quarrels and struggles that we may
have forgotten a very important element in the life of the City--the amusements and pastimes of the citizens.
Never was there a time when the City had more amusements than in these centuries. You have seen that it was
always a rich town: its craftsmen were well paid: food was abundant: the people were well fed always, except
in times of famine, which were rare. There were taverns with music and singing: there were pageants,
wonderful processions representing all kinds of marvels, devised by the citizens to please the King or to
please themselves: there were plays representing scenes from the Bible and from the Lives of the Saints: there
were tournaments to look at. Then there were the Festivals of the year, Christmas Day, Twelfth Day, Easter,
the Day of St. John the Baptist, Shrove Tuesday, the Day of the Company, May Day, at all of which feasting
and merriment were the rule. The young men, in winter, played at football, hockey, quarterstaff, and single
stick. They had cock fighting, boar fights, and the baiting of bulls and bears. On May Day they erected a
May-pole in every parish: they chose a May Queen: and they had morris-dancing with the lads dressed up as
Robin Hood, Friar Tuck, Little John, Tom the Piper, and other famous characters.
[Illustration: BEAR-BAITING.
(From the Luttrell Psalter.)]
Then they shot with the bow and the cross-bow for prizes: they had wrestlings and they had foot races.
The two great festivals of the year were the Eve of St. John the Baptist and the Day of the Company.
[Illustration: SHOOTING AT THE BUTTS WITH THE LONG-BOW.]
On the former there took place the March of the Watch. Bonfires were lit in the streets, not for warmth but in
order to purge and cleanse the air of the narrow streets: at the open doors stood tables with meat and drink,
neighbour inviting neighbour to hospitality. Then the doors were wreathed with green branches, leaves, and
flowers: lamps of glass were hanging over them with oil burning all the night: some hung out branches of iron
curiously wrought with hundreds of hanging lights. And everywhere the cheerful sounds of music and singing
and the dancing of the prentice lads and girls in the open street. Through the midst of this joyousness filed the
Watch. Four thousand men took part in this procession which was certainly the finest thing that Mediæval
London had to show. To light the procession on its way the City found two hundred cressets or lanterns, the
Companies found five hundred and the constables of London, two hundred and fifty in number, each carried
one. The number of men who carried and attended to the cressets was two thousand. Then followed the Watch
itself, consisting of two thousand captains, lieutenants, sergeants, drummers and fifers, standard bearers,
trumpeters, demilances on great horses, bowmen, pikemen, with morris-dancers and minstrels--their armour
all polished bright and some even gilded. No painter has ever painted this March: yet of all things, mediæval,
it was the most beautiful and the most mediæval.
On the day of the Company, i.e. the Company's Saint's Day, all the members assembled in the Hall, every man
in a new livery, in the morning. First they formed in procession and marched to church, headed by priests and
singing boys, in surplices: after these walked the servants, clerks, assistants, the chaplain, the Mayor's
sergeants, often the Lord Mayor himself. Lastly came the Court with the Master and Wardens followed by the
Livery, i.e. the members.
The History of London, by Walter Besant 50
After church they returned in like manner to the Hall, where a great banquet awaited them, music played in
the gallery: the banners of the Company were hung over their heads: they burned scented wood: they sat in
order, Master and Wardens and illustrious guests at the high table: and the freemen below, every man with his
wife or some maiden if he were unmarried. After dinner the loving cup went round: the minstrels led in the
players: and they had dramatic shows, songs, dances and 'mummeries' for the rest of the day.
Do not think of mediæval London as a dull place--it was full of life and of brightness: the streets were narrow
perhaps, but they were full of colour from the bright dresses of all--the liveries of the Companies--the liveries
of the great nobles--the splendid costume of the knights and richer class. The craftsman worked from daylight
till curfew in the winter: from five or six in the summer: he had a long day: but he had three holidays: he had
his evenings: and his Sundays. A dull time was going to fall upon the Londoners, but not yet for two hundred
years.
36. WESTMINSTER ABBEY.
Hitherto our attention has been confined to the City within the walls. It is time to step outside the walls.
All this time, i.e. ever since peaceful occupation became possible, a town had been growing up on the west
side of London. You have seen that formerly there spread a broad marsh over this part. Some rising ground
kept what is now the Strand above the river, but Westminster, except for certain reed-grown islets, was
nothing but a marsh covered over twice in the day by the tide. The river thus spreading out over marshes on
either bank was quite shallow, and could in certain places be forded. The spot where any ford existed
afterwards became a ferry. Lambeth Bridge spans the river at one such place, the memory of which is now
maintained in the name of the Horseferry Road. The largest of these islets was once called Thorney, i.e. the
Isle of Thorns. If you will take a map of Westminster, shift the bank of the river so as to make it flow along
Abingdon Street, draw a stream running down College Street into the Thames; another running into the
Thames across King Street, and draw a ditch or moat connecting the two streams along Delahaye Street and
Princes Street you will have Thorney, about a quarter of a mile long, and not quite so much broad, standing
just above high water level. This was the original Precinct of Westminster.
[Illustration: TOMB OF EDWARD III. IN WESTMINSTER ABBEY.]
The Abbey of St. Peter's, Westminster, is said to have been founded on the first conversion of the East
Saxons, and at the same time as the Foundation of St. Paul's. We know nothing about the foundation of the
church. During the Danish troubles the Abbey was deserted. It was refounded by Dunstan. It was, however,
rebuilt in much greater splendour by Edward the Confessor. Of his work something still remains, and can be
pointed out to the visitor. But the present Abbey contains work by Henry III., Edward I., Richard
II.--Whittington being commissioner for the work--Henry VII. and Wren, Hawksmoor and Gilbert Scott the
architects.
There is no monument on British soil more venerable than Westminster Abbey. You must not think that you
know the place when you have visited it once or twice. You must go there again and again. Every visit should
teach you something of your country and its history. The building itself betraying to those who can read
architecture the various periods at which its builders lived: the beauty of the building, the solemnity of the
services--these are things which one must visit the Abbey often in order to understand. Then there are the
associations of the Abbey; the things that have been done in the Abbey: the crowning of the Kings, in a long
line from Edward the Confessor downwards. Here Edward the Fourth's Queen, Elizabeth Woodville, took
sanctuary when her husband suffered reverse: here the unfortunate Edward V. was born. Here the same
unhappy Queen brought her two boys when her husband died. Here Caxton set up his first printing press: here
is the coronation chair. Here is the shrine of the sainted Edward the Confessor. It is robbed of its precious
stones and its gold: but the shrine is the same as that before which for five hundred years people knelt as to the
protector saint of England. This is the burial-place of no fewer than twenty-six of our Kings and their Queens.
The History of London, by Walter Besant 51
This is the sacred spot where we have buried most of our great men. To name a few whose monuments you
should look for, here are Sir William Temple, Lord Chatham, Fox and Wilberforce, among statesmen; of
soldiers there are Prince Rupert and Monk; of Indian fame, here are Lord Lawrence and Lord Clyde; of
sailors, Blake, Cloudesley Shovel, and Lord Dundonald. Of poets, Chaucer, Spenser, Beaumont, Ben Jonson,
Dryden, Prior, Addison, Gay, Campbell. Of historians and prose writers, Samuel Johnson, Macaulay, Dickens,
Livingston, Isaac Newton. Many others there are to look for, notably the great poet Tennyson, buried here in
October 1892.
Read what was written by Jeremy Taylor, a great divine, on Westminster Abbey:--
'A man may read a sermon, the best and most passionate that ever man preached, if he shall but enter into the
sepulchre of Kings.... There the warlike and the peaceful, the fortunate and the miserable, the beloved and the
despised princes mingle their dust and pay down their symbol of mortality; and tell all the world that when we
die our ashes shall be equal to kings, and our accounts easier, and our pains or our crowns shall be less.'
37. THE COURT AT WESTMINSTER.
Although the Kings of England have occasionally lodged in the Tower and even at Baynard's Castle, and
other places in the City, the permanent home of the Court was always from Edward the Confessor to Henry
VIII. at the Royal Palace of Westminster. Of this building, large, rambling, picturesque, only two parts are
left, Westminster Hall and the crypt of St. Stephen's Chapel. When King Henry VIII. exchanged Westminster
for Whitehall the rooms of the old Palace were given over to various purposes. One of them was the Star
Chamber, in which the Star Chamber Court was held: one was the Exchequer Chamber: St. Stephen's Chapel
was the House of Commons; and the House of Lords sat in the Old Court of Bequests. All that was left of the
Palace except the Great Hall, was destroyed in the fire of 1834. Very fortunately the Hall was saved. This
magnificent structure, one of the largest rooms in the world not supported by pillars, was built by William
Rufus, and altered by Richard II. Here have been held Parliaments and Grand Councils. Here have been many
State trials. Sir William Wallace was condemned in this Hall. Sir Thomas More; the Protector Somerset; Lady
Jane Grey; Anne Boleyn; King Charles I.; the rebels of 1745, Lords Kilmarnock, Balmerino and Lovat: Earl
Ferrers, for murdering his steward; all these were condemned. One or two have been acquitted, Lord
Byron--cousin of the poet--for killing Mr. Chaworth: and Warren Hastings, the great Indian statesman. In
Westminster Hall used to be held the Coronation Banquets at which the hereditary champion rode into the
Hall in full armour and threw down a glove.
After the removal of the Court the Hall became the Law Courts. It is almost incredible that three Courts sat in
this Hall, cases being heard before three Judges at the same time. In addition to the Courts, shops or stalls
were ranged along the walls where dealers in toys, milliners, sempstresses, stationers and booksellers sold
their wares. A picture exists showing this extraordinary use of the Hall.
It is more difficult to restore ancient Westminster than any part of the City. We must remember that the great
Hall formed part of a square or quadrangle on which were the private rooms of the Sovereign, the State rooms
of audience and banquet, the official rooms of the King's ministers and servants; this court led into others--one
knows not how many--but certainly as many as belong to the older part of Hampton Court, which may be
taken as resembling Westminster Palace in its leading features. The courts were filled with men-at-arms,
serving men, pages, and minstrels. They went backwards and forwards on their business or they lay about in
the sun and gambled. Sometimes there crossed the court some great noble followed by two or three of his
servants on his way to a Council: or a bishop with his chaplain, to have speech with the King: or a group of
townsmen after a brawl, who had been brought here with ropes about their necks, uncertain whether all would
be pardoned or half a dozen hanged, the uncertainty lending a very repentant and anxious look to their faces.
Or it would be the Queen's most Excellent Highness herself with her ladies riding forth to see the hunt. This
was the daily life of the Court: we read the dry history of what happened but we forget the scenery in which it
happened--the crowds of nobles, bishops, abbots, knights, men-at-arms, serving men, among whom all these
The History of London, by Walter Besant 52
things took place. We are apt to forget, as well, the extraordinary brightness, the colour, the glitter and gleam
that belonged to those times when every man went dressed in some gay livery wearing the colours and the
crest of his lord. Who rides there, the hart couchant--the deer at rest--upon his helm? A Knight belonging to
the Court: one of the Knights of King Richard the Second. Who march with the bear and ragged staff upon
their arms? They are the Livery of the Earl of Warwick. The clash and gleam of arms and armour everywhere:
colour on the men as well as the women: colour on the trappings of the horses: colour on the hanging arras of
the wall: colour on the cloth of scarlet which they hang out of the windows when the royal pageant rides
along.
Close to the Palace, the Abbey. That too belongs to the time. Within the Abbey precincts the people are
almost as crowded as in the Palace. But it is a different crowd. There is not so much colour: no arms or
armour: an orderly crowd: there are the Benedictine monks themselves, with their crowd of servants, cooks,
and refectory men: brewers: bakers: clothiers: architects, builders and masons: scribes and lawyers: foresters
and farmers from the estates: stewards: cellarers: singing boys: organists--for the Abbey Church of St. Peter is
as great and as rich and maintains as large an army of servants as the Cathedral Church of St. Paul.
38. JUSTICE AND PUNISHMENTS.
In the time of the Plantagenets the punishments inflicted on wrongdoers were much more lenient than those
which followed in later years. There is none of that brutal flogging which grew up in the last century, the
worst time in the whole history of the country, for the people. This flogging not only in the army and navy but
also for such offences as vagrancy, lasted even into the present century. In the year 1804 six women were
publicly flogged at Gloucester for this offence. Under Whittington this barbarous cruelty would not have been
done. There were, it is true, certain punishments which seem excessively cruel. If a man struck a sheriff or an
alderman he was sentenced to have his right hand chopped off. That is, indeed, worse than hanging. But,
consider, the whole strength of London lay in its power to act and its resolution always to act, as one man.
This could only be effected by habitual obedience to law and the most profound respect to the executive
officers. Therefore the worst penalty possible--that which deprived a man of his power to work and his power
to fight--which reduced him to ruin--which made his innocent children beggars--which branded him till death
as a malefactor of the most dangerous kind--was inflicted for such an offence. Here, again, mercy stepped in;
for, when the criminal was brought out for execution, if he expressed contrition the offended officer,
represented by the Alderman of the Ward--begged that he might be pardoned.
For burglary criminals were ruthlessly hanged. This crime is bad enough now; it is a crime which ought at all
times to be punished with the utmost rigour. But in these days what is it that a burglar can carry away from an
ordinary house? A clock or two: a silver ring: a lady's watch and chain: a few trinkets: if any money, then only
a purse with two or three pounds. The wealth of the family is invested in various securities: if the burglar
takes the papers they are of no use to him: there is a current account at the bank; but that cannot be touched.
Books, engravings, candlesticks, plated spoons--these are of little real value. Formerly, however, every man
kept all his money--all his wealth--in his own house; if he was a rich merchant he had a stone safe or strong
box constructed in the wall of his cellar or basement--I have seen such a safe in an old house pulled down
about seven years ago. If he was only a small trader or craftsman he kept his money in a box: this he hid: there
were various hiding places: behind the bed, under the hearthstone--but they were all known. A burglar,
therefore, might, and very often did, take away the whole of a man's property and reduce him to ruin. For this
reason it was very wisely ordered that a burglar should be hanged.
They began in the reign of Henry IV. to burn heretics. Later on they burned witches and poisoners. As yet
they had not begun to slice off ears and to slit noses: there was no rack: nobody was tortured: nobody was
branded on the hand: there was no whipping of women in Bridewell as a public show--that came later: there
was no flogging at the cart tail.
The History of London, by Walter Besant 53
Punishments were mild. Sometimes the criminal performed the amende honorable, marching along Chepe
bareheaded and wearing nothing but a white shirt, carrying a great wax taper, escorted by the Mayor's
sergeants. There was a ducking-stool on the other side of the river, at Bank Side, in which scolds were
ducked. There was the thewe, which was a chair in which women were made to sit, lifted high above the
crowd, exposed to their derision. There was the pillory, which served for almost all the cases which now come
before a police magistrate--adulteration, false weights and measures, selling bad meat: pretending to be an
officer of the Mayor: making and selling bad work: forging title deeds; stealing--all were punished in the same
way. The offender was carried or led through the City--sometimes mounted with his head to the horse's
tail--always with something about his neck to show the nature of his offence, and placed in pillory for a
certain time.
There was one punishment always in reserve--the worst of all. This was deprivation of the privileges of a
freeman and banishment from the City. 'Go,' said the Mayor. 'Thou shalt dwell with us; trade with us;
converse with us; no more. Go.' And so that source of trouble was removed.
We have seen how the trades formed companies--every trade having its own company. It must not, however,
be understood that the working man gained much power by their unions. They were organised: they had to
obey: obedience was very good for them as it is for all of us, always; but it must be obedience to a corporate
body, not to a master. This they did not understand and they tried to form 'covins' or trades unions of their
own. The City put down these attempts with a stern hand. The trade companies ruled hours of work, wages,
and standard of work. Lastly, though there was no City police to guard the streets, there were certain laws for
the maintenance of order. Nobody under the rank of knight was to carry arms in the streets: no one was to
walk about the street after nine at night: houses were not to be built over streets. In a word, there were not
many laws; but the people were law abiding. And this, perhaps, as much as anything else, explains the
greatness of London.
[Illustration: THE EMBARKATION OF HENRY VIII. FROM DOVER, 1520.
(From the original painting at Hampton Court.)]
39. THE POLITICAL POWER OF LONDON.
Until the rapid growth of the manufacturing interests created immense cities in the North, the wealth and
prosperity and population of London gave it a consideration and power in the political situation which was
unequalled by that of any other mediæval city. Even Paris, for instance, has never held an equal importance in
the history of France. This power has been especially, and significantly, employed in the election and
proclamation of Kings. It is not only that London has been the place of proclamation: it is that the Londoners
themselves have repeatedly said, 'This shall be our King': and, as repeatedly, by that very act, have given him
to understand that if he would not reign well he should, like some of his predecessors, be deposed. London
chose Kings Edmund and Harold Harefoot, before the Conquest. After the Conquest, they elected Stephen at a
folkmote, a gathering of all the citizens. They put him on the Throne and they kept him there. The power of
the Londoners is very well put by Froissart, who wrote in the time of Richard II. and Henry IV., and was an
eyewitness of many things which he relates. 'The English,' he says, 'are the worst people in the world: the
most obstinate and the most presumptuous: and, of all England, the Londoners are the leaders; for, to say the
truth, they are very powerful in men and in wealth. In the City there are 24,000 men completely armed from
head to foot and full 30,000 archers. This is a great force and they are bold and courageous, and the more
blood is spilled, the greater is their courage.'
Take the deposition of Edward II., also described by Froissart. He says that when the Londoners found the
King 'besotted' with his favourites, they sent word to Queen Isabella that if she could land in England with
300 armed men she would find the citizens of London and the majority of the nobles and commonalty ready
to join her and place her on the Throne. This the Queen effected: the citizens joined the little army thus
The History of London, by Walter Besant 54
collected--without their assistance, Froissart says, the thing could not have been done--and made Edward
prisoner at Berkeley Castle.
Or there was the capture of Richard II. This also was effected by an army composed entirely of Londoners
12,000 strong, led by Henry of Lancaster. Afterwards, when Henry of Lancaster was Henry IV., and a
conspiracy was formed against him, the Lord Mayor said, 'Sire, King we have made you: King we will keep
you.' The City played almost as great a part against Henry VI.--half-heartedly at first, because they thought
that as he had no children there would be at some time or other an end. Moreover, they could not readily
forget his grandfather, their own King; and his father, the hero of Agincourt. When, however, a son was born,
the Londoners became openly and unreservedly Yorkists. And the Yorkists triumphed. The election of
Richard III. was made in London. When Lady Jane Grey was proclaimed Queen, it was not by the Mayor and
Aldermen, but by the Duke of Northumberland, and the City looked on in apathy, expecting trouble. The
greatest strength of Elizabeth lay in the affection and support of London, which never wavered. Had Charles I.
conciliated the City he might have died in his bed, still King of England. It was the City which forced James
II. to fly and called over William Prince of Orange. It was, again, London which supported Pitt in his firm and
uncompromising resistance to Napoleon. And in the end Napoleon was beaten. It cannot be too often repeated
that two causes made the strength of London: the unity of the City, so that its vast population moved as one
man: and its wealth. The King thought of the subsidies--under the names of loans, grants,
benevolences--which he could extort from the merchants. We who enjoy the fruits of the long struggle
maintained especially by London for the right of managing our own affairs, especially in the matter of
taxation, cannot understand the tyrannies which the people of old had to endure from Kings and nobles.
Richard II., for instance, forced the citizens to sign and seal blank 'charts'--try to imagine the Prime Minister
making the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, the Common Council men, and all the more important merchants sign
blank cheques to be filled in as he pleased! That, however, was the last exaction of Richard II. Henry of
Lancaster went out with 12,000 Londoners, and made him prisoner.
Another factor, less generally understood, assisted and developed the power of London.
It was also the position of the City as the centre of the country; not geographically, which would give
Warwick that position, but from the construction of the roads and from its position on the Thames. But, to
repeat, the use and wont of the City to act together by order of the Mayor, principally made it so great a
power. Whatever troubles might arise, here was a solid body--'24,000 men at arms and 30,000 archers,' all
acting on one side. The rest of the country was scattered, uncertain, inclined this way and that. The City, to
use a modern phrase, 'voted solid.' There were no differences of opinion in the City. And that, even more than
its wealth, made London a far more important factor, politically, than the barons with all their following.
40. ELIZABETHAN LONDON.
PART I.
A map of Elizabethan London, drawn by one Agas, which is almost a picture as well as a map, shows us very
clearly the aspect of the City. Let us lay down the map before us. First of all, we observe the wall of the City;
it is carefully drawn of uniform height, with battlements, and at regular intervals, bastions. Outside the wall
there is the ditch, but it is now, as Stow describes it, laid out in gardens--cows are grazing in some parts of
it--and there are mean houses built on the other side of it. There is a single street of houses with large gardens
outside Aldgate, which is now Whitechapel. The north side of Houndsditch is already built. A street of houses
runs north of Bishopsgate. No houses stand between this street and two or three streets outside Cripplegate.
Moorfields are really fields. There are windmills, gardens with summer-houses, pasture-fields with cows, a
large 'dogge house,' and fields where women appear to be laying out clothes to dry. Really, they are tenter
fields, i.e. fields provided with 'tenters,' or pegs, by means of which cloth could be stretched. North of
Moorfields is indicated rising ground with woods. There can be no doubt at all as to the course of the wall,
which is here marked with the greatest clearness. On the east of the Tower there is already a crowded quarter
in the Precinct of St. Katherine's: and a few buildings mark the former site of the great monastery of
Eastminster. In the Minories a group of new houses marks the site of the nunnery which stood here. London
Bridge is covered with houses: on Bank Side, Southwark, there are two round buildings, 'The Bearebayting'
and 'The Bullebayting.' There is also, opposite to Blackfriars, Paris Garden, a very favourite place of resort for
the citizens. But as yet there are no theatres. Along the river outside the walls we find, beyond Bridewell
Palace, an open space where was formerly Whitefriars. Here presently grew up a curious colony called
Alsatia, which claimed to retain the right of Sanctuary once belonging to the monastery. Arrests for debt could
not be made within its limits. That is to say, it was so claimed by the residents, who resisted any attempt to
violate this privilege by force of arms. It was a notorious place in the seventeenth century, filled with rogues
and broken-down gamblers, spendthrifts and profligates. As yet (when this map was drawn) there are very few
houses between Whitefriars and the Temple. Beyond the Temple there are marked Arundel Place, Paget Place,
Somerset Place, the Savoy, York Place. Duresme--i.e. Durham--Place, and 'the Court'--i.e. Whitehall--of
which the map gives a plan, which gives us a clear idea of the plan and appearance of this palace, of which
only the Banqueting Hall remains. The Savoy, at the time (1561) was a hospital. Henry VII. made a hospital
of it, dedicated to St. John the Baptist, receiving 100 poor people. At the Dissolution of the Monasteries it was
suppressed. Queen Mary restored it, and it continued as a hospital till the year 1702, when it was finally
suppressed. Like Whitefriars, and for the same reason, it claimed the right of Sanctuary: therefore it became
the harbour of people described as 'rogues and masterless men.' In the City itself there are many large gardens
and open spaces. The courts of the Grey Friars, now a school, are still standing: there are gardens on the site
of the Austin Friars' monastery and gardens between Broad Street and Bishopsgate Street. We must not think
of London as a city crowded with narrow lanes and courts, the houses almost touching their opposite
neighbours. Such courts were only found beside the river: many streets, it is true, were narrow, but there were
broad thoroughfares like Cheapside, Gracechurch Street, Canwicke (now Cannon Street) Tower Street, and
Fenchurch Street. The river is covered with boats: one of them is a barge filled with soldiers, which is being
tugged by a four-oared boat: packhorses are being taken to the river to drink: below bridge the lighters begin:
two or three vessels are moored at Billingsgate: the ships begin opposite the Tower: two or three great
three-masted vessels are shown: and two or three smaller ships of the kind called ketch, sloop, or hoy. Along
the river front of the Tower are mounted cannon. The ditch of the Tower is filled with water. On Tower Hill
there stands a permanent gallows: beside it is some small structure, which is probably a pillory with the
false doctrine. Moreover, there were other reasons why the citizens under Queen Elizabeth could not regret
the past.
[Illustration: COACHES IN THE REIGN OF ELIZABETH.
(From 'Archcæologia.')]
The parish churches were changed. The walls, once covered with paintings of saints and angels, were now
scraped or whitewashed: instead of altars with blazing lights, there was a plain table: there were no more
watching candles: there were no more splendid robes for the priest and the altar boys: the priest was
transformed into a preacher: the service consisted of plain prayers, the reading of the Bible, and a sermon. In
very few churches was there an organ. There was no external beauty in religion. Therefore external beauty in
the church itself ceased for three hundred years to be desired. What was required was neatness, with ample
space for all to be seated, so arranged that all might hear the sermon. And whereas under the Plantagenets
every other man was a priest, a friar, or some officer or servant of a monastery, one only met here and there a
clergyman with black gown and Genevan bands.
This change alone transformed London. But there were other changes. Most of the great nobles had left the
City. Long before they went away their following had been cut down to modest numbers: their great barracks
had become useless: they were let out in tenements, and were falling into decay: some of them had been
removed to make way for warehouses and offices: one or two remained till the Great Fire of 1666. Among
them were Baynard's Castle, close to Blackfriars, and Cold Harbour. A few nobles continued to have houses
in the City. In the time of Charles II., the Duke of Buckingham had a house on College Hill, and the palaces
along the Strand still remained.
[Illustration: THE CITY FROM SOUTHWARK.]
The merchants' houses took the place of these palaces. They were built either in the form of a quadrangle,
standing round a garden, with a cloister or covered way running round, of which Gresham House, pulled
down in the last century, was a very fine example. But, since few merchants could afford to build over so
large a piece of ground and land was too valuable to be wasted on broad lawns and open courts, the houses
were built in four or five stories, with rich carvings all over the front. The house called Sir Paul Pinder's
House in Bishopsgate Street, pulled down only a year or two ago, was a very fine example of such a house.
The great hall was henceforth only built in great country houses: in the City the following of the richest
merchants, in his private house, consisted of a few servants only; small rooms henceforward became the rule:
when entertainments and festivities on a large scale are held, the Companies' Halls may be used. The inferior
kind of Elizabethan house may still be seen in Holborn--outside of Staple Inn: in Wych Street: in Cloth Fair:
and one or two other places. They were narrow: three or four stories high: each story projected beyond the one
below: they were gabled: the windows were latticed, with small diamond panes of glass: they were built of
plaster and timber. Building with brick only began in the reign of James the First. Before every house hung a
sign, on which was painted the figure by which the house was known: some of these signs may still be seen:
there is one in Holywell Street: one in Ivy Lane: and there are many old Inns which still keep their ancient
signs.
42. ELIZABETHAN LONDON.
PART III.
The population of London at this time was perhaps, for it is not certain, 150,000. There were no suburbs,
unless we call the Strand and Smithfield suburbs; the London citizen stepped outside the gates into the open
country. This fact must be remembered when we think of the narrow lanes. The great danger of the City still
remained, that of fire, for though the better houses were built of stone, the inferior sort, as was stated above,
The History of London, by Walter Besant 57
continued to be built of timber and plaster. There were no vehicles in the streets except carts, and the number
of these was restricted to 420. When you think of London streets at this time remember that in most of them,
in all except the busy streets and the chief thoroughfares, there was hardly ever any noise of rumbling wheels.
The packhorses followed each other in long procession, laden with everything; there were doubtless
wheelbarrows and hand carts; but the rumbling of the wheels was not yet a part of the daily noise.
The Lord Mayor was directed by Elizabeth always to keep a certain number of the citizens drilled and
instructed in the use of arms. When the Spanish invasion was threatened, the Queen ordered a body of troops
to be raised instantly. In a single day 1,000 men, fully equipped, were marched off to camp. Afterwards
10,000 men were sent off, and thirty-eight ships were supplied. Both men and sailors were raised by
impressment. A constant danger to the peace of the City was the turbulence of the prentices, these lads were
always ready to rush into the streets, shouting, ready to attack or destroy whatever was unpopular at the
moment. Thus, early in the reign of Henry VIII., at a time when there was great animosity against foreign
merchants, of whom there were a great many beside the Hanse merchants of the Steelyard, there was a riot in
which a great many houses of foreigners were destroyed, many persons were killed, Newgate was assailed and
taken, eleven rioters hanged and 400 more taken before the King with halters round their necks to receive his
pardon. This was called 'Evil May Day.' The disorderly conduct of the prentices continued during Elizabeth's
reign, she ordered the Provost-Marshal in order to put an end to this trouble, to hang all disorderly persons so
convicted by any Justice of the Peace.
There was much complaint of extravagance in dress: rules were passed by the Common Council on the
subject. Prentices especially were forbidden to dress in any but the warmest and plainest materials. The dress
of the Blue Coat boy is exactly the dress of the prentice of the period, including the flat cap which the modern
wearer of the dress carries in his pocket.
[Illustration: SOUTH-EAST PART OF LONDON IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY, SHOWING THE
TOWER AND WALL.]
The punishments of this time are much more severe than had been found necessary in the Plantagenet period.
They not only carried criminals in shameful procession through the City, but they flogged girls for idleness,
apprentices for immorality, and rogues for selling goods falsely described. A 'pillar of reformation' was set up
at the Standard in Cheap; here on Sunday morning the mayor superintended the flogging of young servants.
When Lady Jane Grey was proclaimed Queen a young fellow, for speaking slightingly of her title, had his ears
nailed to the pillory and afterwards cut off, heretics were burned, traitors were hanged first for a few minutes
and then taken down and cut open--one of the most horrible punishments ever inflicted.
The Reformation, which suppressed the religious Houses, at the same time suppressed the hospitals which
were all religious Houses and the schools which belonged to the religious Houses. St. Bartholomew's, St.
Thomas's, St. Mary's, St. Mary of Bethlehem, besides the smaller houses, were all suppressed. The sick people
were sent back to their own houses; the brethren and sisters were dispersed. One House contained one
hundred blind men, all these were cast adrift; another contained a number of aged priests--these were turned
into the streets. Eight schools perished at the Dissolution. For a time London had neither schools nor
hospitals.
This could not continue. Bartholomew's, St. Thomas's, Bethlehem, and, under Queen Mary, the Savoy were
refounded under new statutes as hospitals. For schools, St. Paul's which was never closed, was endowed by
Dean Colet; St. Anthony's continued, the Blue Coat School was founded on the site of the Franciscan House.
The Mercers took over the school of St. Thomas. The Merchant Taylors founded their school. In Southwark,
schools were founded at St. Olave's and St. Saviour's. A few years later Charterhouse was converted into an
almshouse and a school.
43. TRADE.
The History of London, by Walter Besant 58
PART I.
London was anciently the resort of 'foreign' merchants. It was rich because 'foreign' merchants brought and
exchanged their goods at this port. There were no ships built in England until the reign of King Alfred. When
the kingdom became tranquil he is said to have hired out his ships to foreign merchants. A list of tolls paid by
foreign ships in the reign of King Ethelred II. shows that the imports were considerable. The foreign
merchants, however, were not to 'forestall their markets from the burghers of London,' so that the retail trade
was kept in native hands. When retail trade was separated from wholesale trade all that the London merchants
had was the collection, the warehousing, and the sale of the exports. It is reasonable to suppose that foreign
merchants coming to the City year after year would find it useful to have a permanent settlement--a wharf
with officers and servants of their own. Such a settlement was, no doubt, permitted from very early times. But
in the year 1169 was founded a trade association which, for wealth, success, and importance, might compare
with our East India Company. This was the Hanseatic League (so called from the word Hansa, a convention).
In the League were confederated: first, twelve towns in the Baltic, Lübeck at the head; next, sixty-four--and
even eighty--German towns. They were first associated for protection against pirates: they speedily became
the greatest trading company of the period. In the reign of Henry III. the League obtained a Royal Charter
granting them liberty of constant residence at a place in London. They were permitted to have a permanent
establishment at a place called the Steelyard--i.e. the place where the Steelyard or Scales had formerly been
kept--under certain conditions, including the payment of custom dues. They were called the Merchants of the
Steelyard: they at once drew to themselves the whole trade of England with the northern ports: and they
remained there for nearly 400 years.
There was another association of foreigners called the Merchants of the Staple. That is to say, they dealed in
what was called the 'staples' of England--in the raw produce, as lead, tin, wool, &c. Gradually, however, the
word Staple came to be applied solely to wool as the most important export. The Lord Chancellor, to this day,
is seated on a Woolsack. The Merchants of the Staple became merged in the Merchants of the Steelyard.
These foreign merchants were at all times extremely unpopular with the Londoners, who envied their wealth,
which they thought was made at the expense of the City, not understanding, for a long time, that the same way
of wealth was open to themselves. When they began to put forth merchant ships on their own account, they at
first sought the southern ports, sailing to Dunquerque, Sluys, Rouen, Havre, Bordeaux, Lisbon, and even to
the Mediterranean ports. Whittington's trade was entirely with the South. It was not at Lübeck or on the shores
of the Baltic that he found his cloth of gold, his rich velvets, his silks, his gold embroidery, his scented wood,
his wines, his precious stones. And the reason why he sent his ships to the South was that the trade of the
North was in the hands of the Steelyard.
Edward III. seems first of our kings to have understood the value of manufactures and of foreign trade. He
first passed laws for the repair of the highways: under his reign the Merchant Adventurers were encouraged
and assisted: he first stimulated the making of English cloth instead of selling our wool: under him the
shipping of the London merchants began to increase and to develop. Still the foreign merchants continued to
occupy the Steelyard: still our merchants were shut out of the northern ports: still other foreigners received
permission to settle: even craftsmen came over from Germany and the Low Countries and followed their trade
in London. Richard III., in order to please the citizens, ordered their expulsion, but it does not appear that the
order was obeyed. Henry VII., on the other hand, persuaded many Flemish woollen manufacturers to come
over to this country.
Early in the sixteenth century the exports of English cloth by the foreign merchants amounted to 44,000
pieces, while the English ships took away no more than 1,000 pieces. When our own merchants were prepared
with ships and had what may be called the machinery of trade; as a market, wharves, permission to buy and
sell; it is obvious that the old state of things could no longer continue. It was not, however, until the reign of
Edward VI. that the foreign merchants were finally deprived of all their privileges and charters.
The History of London, by Walter Besant 59
These rivals, with their powerful organisations and their hold over all the northern ports, once out of the way
the English merchants began to push out their enterprises in all directions. You shall see immediately how
they prospered.
Meantime there remains a monument erected in memory of the Hanseatic League. In the reign of Queen Anne
the merchants of Hamburg presented to the church where the merchants of the Steelyard had worshipped for
400 years, a splendid screen of carved wood. Unless the church, which is already threatened with destruction,
is pulled down, you should go to see that screen, and remember all that it means and commemorates.
44. TRADE.
PART II.
English trade, that is to say, trade in English hands, practically began with Edward III. and, slowly increasing
under his successors, gained an enormous development under Elizabeth. Several causes operated to produce
this increase. In the first place the abolition of the Steelyard, though ordered by Edward VI., was not
completely carried out till many years afterwards. During this period the merchants were learning the
immense possibilities open to them when this incubus should be removed. Next, the great rival of London,
Antwerp, suffered, like the rest of the Netherlands, from the religious wars. Thirdly, the wise and farseeing
action of Gresham transferred the commercial centre of the northern world from that town to London.
Antwerp in the fifteenth century was the richest and most prosperous city in western Europe. There were
200,000 inhabitants, a great many more than could be counted in London: 5,000 merchants met every day in
the Bourse for the transaction of business: 2,500 vessels might be counted in the river: 500 loaded waggons
entered every day from the country. It was the port of the great and rich manufacturing towns of Bruges and
Ghent. In the latter town there were 40,000 weavers, and an army of 80,000 men fully armed and equipped,
could be raised at any moment. The former town, Bruges, was the Market--the actual commercial centre--of
the world. Hither came the merchants of Venice and Genoa, bringing the silks, velvets, cloth of gold, spices
and precious stones from the East to exchange for the English wool and the produce of Germany and the
Baltic.
[Illustration: KING EDWARD VI.
(From a picture belonging to H. Hucks Gibbs, Esq.)]
The Religious Wars of the sixteenth century: the ferocities, cruelties, and savagery of those wars: depopulated
and ruined this rich and flourishing country: the Inquisition drove thousands of Flemings, an industrious and
orderly folk, to England, where they established silk manufactures: and the carrying trade which had been
wholly in the hands of the Antwerp shipowners was diverted and went across the narrow seas to London,
where it has ever since remained.
