"I regret this circumstance," said Mr. Compton, "for several reasons. I have always held you, Weston, in the
highest estimation, nor do I see sufficient cause, from this event, to alter my estimate; but I have always found
my best clerks those who have been in the habit of spending their evenings elsewhere than in theatres and
taverns. I am not surprised at the part you have taken, Mr. Williams; and it now rests with you, whether you
remain in this office or leave. I will not have the junior clerks in this establishment held in subjection to those
who have been with me a few years longer; nor will I have a system of insult and opposition continued, which
must eventually lead to unpleasant results. If I hear any more of this matter, or find that you persist in your
unwarranted insults on Mr. Weston, I shall at once dismiss you from my service. You did well, Mr. Hardy, in
interfering to prevent a disgraceful fight; and, much as I dislike tale-bearing, I request you to inform me, for
the future, of any unpleasantness arising to Mr. Weston from this affair."
Williams was terribly crest-fallen, and the tide of office opinion turned from him in favour of George and
Hardy, who, without crowing over the victory they had gained, yet showed a manly determination not to allow
an insult which reflected upon their characters.
"I tell you what it is," whispered Lawson to Williams; "Old Compton takes a fancy to those two sneaking
fellows, and, after this affair, the office will get too hot for us if we do not draw it milder to them. If I were
you, I should waylay them outside the office and say something civil, by way of soft soap, so as to nip this
matter off, for you've got the worst of it so far."
Williams determined to accept the hint Lawson had given him, and when the office closed, remained in the
court until George came out.
"Mr. Weston," he said, stretching out his hand, which George felt would be mean-spirited not to take, "that
was an unpleasant affair this morning, but I didn't think you would fire up as you did; and when I let fly at
you, it was only in joke."
"I must deny that it was a joke," George replied; "it was an intended insult. Probably you might not have
thought it would have produced indignation in me, because you, evidently, do not understand my feelings in
the matter. However, let the thing drop now. I will not retract what I said to you this morning, that you lied in
forming that estimate of my character, nor do I ask you to retract your words, unless your conscience tells you
that you wronged me."
"What I said was hasty, and I don't mind eating all my words," said Williams; "so, as the song says, 'Come, let
us be happy together.' Will you come into the King's Head, and take a glass of wine on the strength of it?"
"No, thank you," said George; "but as it is no wish of mine to live at loggerheads with any one, here is my
hand upon it."
And then they shook hands, and so the matter ended. But it ended only so far as Williams was concerned. A
day or two afterwards Mr. Brunton was passing the office, and he called in to say "How d'ye do?" to Mr.
Compton. In the course of conversation he asked how George was getting on, and whether he continued to
give satisfaction.
"Yes," said Mr. Compton, "I have no fault to find with him; on the contrary, he is the best junior clerk I ever
had, and I trust him with matters I never placed in the hands of a junior clerk before. But there was an
unfortunate occurrence the other day, which I think it right to mention to you confidentially." And then Mr.
Brunton heard the whole history of the theatre adventure, and its consequences in the office on the following
CHAPTER VI. 32
morning. He was grieved, deeply grieved. At first he could not credit the account; but when he heard that
George had himself confessed to the truth of the circumstances before Mr. Compton, and there was no longer
room to doubt, a tear stood in his eye as he thought of his nephew--that noble, manly boy, whom he loved
with all the affection of a father--stooping to temptation, and acting the part of a deceiver; for Mr. Brunton
had spent an evening with Mrs. Weston and George, and had heard nothing of his having been to a theatre,
nor did he believe Mrs. Weston was aware of it.
"What I have told you is strictly confidential," said Mr. Compton; "but as you are, as it were, the father of
George Weston, I thought it only right that you should know this, in order that you may warn him, if he has
got into the hands of bad companions."
George was absent from the office during the interview, and did not know until some days afterwards of his
uncle's visit.
Mr. Brunton went from Falcon-court a sadder man. He was perplexed and harassed; he could not
conscientiously tell Mrs. Weston, as he had received the information in confidence; he could not speak
directly to George upon the subject, because he would at once have known that Mr. Compton must have given
the statement to his uncle. He was obliged, therefore, to remain passive in the matter for a day or two, and
resolved to spend an evening that week at Islington.
In the meantime the affair became known to Mrs. Weston, and in rather a curious manner. George had worn
his best coat on the evening he went to the theatre; and one day as Mrs. Weston, according to custom, was
brushing it, before putting it away in his drawers, she turned out the pockets, and, amongst other things, drew
forth a well-used play-bill.
"George has never been to the theatre, surely?" she asked herself. "Impossible! he would have told me had he
done so, for he is far too high-principled to deceive me."
But the sight of that play-bill worried Mrs. Weston. She thought over it all day, and longed for the evening to
come, when she might ask George about it.
That evening Mr. Brunton had determined to spend at Islington; and as he was passing Falcon-court, he called
for George on his way, and they walked home together.
The play-bill happened to be on the table when they entered, and it caught the eye of both George and Mr.
Brunton at once.
"Where did you get that from?" asked George, colouring, not with the honest flush of self-respect, but with
the burning sense of deceit detected.
"I found it in your pocket, George; and as I have never found one there before, I thought I would leave it out,
to ask you how you came by it."
"I came by it the other night, when I went to the theatre," said George; for he could not tell a direct falsehood.
"I did not tell you of it at the time, but led you to suppose that I had been at the institution."
Mrs. Weston was indeed sorry to hear George's account of what had passed; but Mr. Brunton felt all his old
confidence in George restored by the open, genuine statement he made.
"George," said Mr. Brunton, "I know you are old enough to manage your affairs for yourself, without an
uncle's interference, but do take from me one word of caution. I fear you may be led unwittingly into error by
your associates. Do be on your guard--'if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.' If you feel it right, and can
CHAPTER VI. 33
conscientiously go with them and adopt their habits, I have no right, nor should I wish to advise you; but if
you feel that you are wrong in what you do, listen to the voice of your better self, and pause to consider. Do
not turn a deaf ear to its entreaties, but be admonished by its counsel, and rather sacrifice friends and pleasure
than that best of all enjoyments--the satisfaction of acting a part of duty to God and yourself."
George did not argue the point with his uncle; he felt himself in the wrong, but could not see his way clear to
get right again.
"I have made so many resolves in my short life," he said, "and have broken them so often, that I will not
pledge myself to making fresh ones My error, in this instance, has not been the fault of my companionships,
but entirely my own; and, as far as I can see, the chief blame lies in having concealed the matter from my
mother, which I did principally out of kindness to her. But I will endeavour to take your counsel, uncle."
Weeks passed away, and with them the vivid memories of that time. George had at length reasoned himself
into the idea that a great deal of unnecessary fuss had been made about nothing, and instead of weaning
himself from the society of Ashton, they became more than ever thrown into each other's company. George
was a constant attendant at the institution, where he was surrounded by a large circle of intimate
acquaintances, with whom much of his time was spent. In the office he had risen in the estimation of the
clerks. Williams and Lawson, finding that opposition was unavailing, altered their conduct towards him, and
became as civil and obliging as they had before been insulting and disagreeable. George began to think he had
belied their characters from not having known sufficient of them; and instead of shunning them, as he had
hitherto done, sometimes took a stroll with them in the evening after office hours, and once or twice had dined
with them at the King's Head.
Imperceptibly, George began to alter. Sooner or later, evil communications must corrupt good manners; and
from continually beholding the lives of his companions, without possessing that one thing needful to have
kept him free from the entanglement of their devices, he became changed into the same image, by the
dangerous power of their influence and example.
A month or two after the theatre adventure, Mrs. Weston received an invitation to spend a week or two in the
country with some relatives, whom she had not seen for several years. Mr. Brunton persuaded her to accept it,
as the change would be beneficial; and George, knowing how seldom his mother had an opportunity for
recreation, added all his powers of argument to induce her to go. The only obstacle presenting itself was the
management of the house during her absence. Mr. Brunton invited George to stay with him while Mrs.
Weston would be away; and she did not like to leave her servant alone in the house with the boarders. It was
at last arranged that George should decline Mr. Brunton's invitation, and have the oversight of the house
during his mother's absence.
The first night after her departure, George brought Hardy home with him to spend the evening, and a pleasant,
quiet time they had together.
"It will be rather dull for you, George," said Hardy, "if Mrs. Weston is going to remain away for a few weeks.
What shall you do on Sunday? You had better come and spend the day with us."
"No, I cannot do that, because I promised I would be here, to let the servant have an opportunity of going to
church. But I mean to ask Ashton to come and spend the day here, and you will come too; and there's Dixon,
he is a nice fellow, I'll ask him to come as well."
"What is to be the programme for the day?" said Hardy. "Of course it will be a quiet one."
"We will all go to church or chapel in the morning, spend the afternoon together at home, and take a stroll in
the evening after the service. Are you agreed?"
CHAPTER VI. 34
"I think we shall have a very nice day of it. Let the other chaps know of it early, and we will meet here in
good time in the morning."
Sunday came, and George's friends arrived as he expected. They were early, and had time for a chat before
starting out.
"Where shall we go this morning?" asked George. "There is a very good minister close by at the church, and
another equally good at the chapel. My principles are unsectarian, and I do not mind where it is we go."
"Don't you think," said Dixon, "we might do ourselves more good by taking a stroll a few miles out of town,
and talking out a sermon for ourselves?"
"I am inclined to the belief that nature is the best preacher," Ashton remarked. "We hear good sermons from
the pulpit, it is true; but words are poor things to teach us of the Creator, in comparison with creation."
"I do not agree with you in your religious sentiments, Ashton, as you know," said George. "Creation tells us
nothing about our Saviour, and, as I read the Scriptures, no man can know God, the Father and Great Creator,
but through Him."
"And yet, if I remember rightly, the Saviour said that He made the world, and without Him was not anything
made that was made--so that He was the Creator; and when we look from nature up to nature's God we see
Him, and connecting His history with the world around us, we have in creation, as I said before, the best
sermon; aye, and what the parsons call a 'gospel' sermon, too."
"I agree with you," said Dixon; "preaching is all very well in its way, and I like a good sermon; but the words
of man can never excel the works of God."
"A proper sermon," replied George, "is not uttered in the words of man; they are God's words applied and
expounded. Nature may speak to the senses, but the Scriptures alone speak to the heart; and that is the object
of preaching. But you are my visitors, and you shall decide the point."
"Then I say a stroll," said Ashton.
"And so do I," chimed in Dixon.
"I am for going to a place of worship," said Hardy.
"And so am I," Ashton replied; "is not all God's universe a place of worship?"
"Perhaps so," answered Hardy; "but I mean the appointed and proper place, where those who try to keep holy
the Sabbath day are accustomed to meet--a church or chapel."
"I side with Hardy," said George. "But I am willing to meet you halfway. If I go with you this morning, you
must all promise to go with me in the evening. But bear in mind I am making a concession, and I go for a
stroll under protest, because it is contrary to my custom."
"All right, old chap," said Ashton. "I never knew anybody's conscience fit them so uneasily as yours does. But
it always did; at school, you were a martyr to it, and I believe the blame lies at the door of dear old Dr.
Seaward, who persisted in training us up in the way we should go, just as if we were all designed to be
parsons."
"Poor old Dr. Seaward!" said George. "If he only knew two of his old scholars were going out for a stroll on
CHAPTER VI. 35
Sunday morning to hear nature preach, I believe his body would hardly contain his troubled spirit."
"And he would appear before us to stop us on our way--"
"Like the spirit before Balaam and his ass, seems the most appropriate simile," said Dixon, "for, if I recollect
rightly, Balaam was going where he should not have gone, and his conscience gave him as much trouble as
Weston's does."
George did not think and say, as Balaam did, "I have sinned;" but he felt the sting of ridicule, and determined
he would allow no conscientious scruple to bring it upon him again during that day.
"After all," he argued with himself, "what is the use of my being conscientious, for I am so wretchedly
inconsistent? I had better go all one way, or all the other, instead of wavering between the two, and
perpetually showing my weakness."
It would have puzzled any one to have told what sermon nature preached to that merry party, as they
wandered through green fields and quiet lanes, talking upon a hundred different subjects, and making the calm
Sabbath morn ring with the strains of their laughter.
"Your idea of creation's voice is better in theory than in practice," George said, when they returned home.
"Can any of you tell me what the text was which nature took to preach from, for I have no distinct
remembrance of it?"
"The text seemed to me to be this," said Dixon, "that 'to everything there is a season, and a time to every
purpose under the heavens--a time to weep and a time to laugh--a time to keep silence and a time to speak;'
and the application was, that we had chosen the right time for enjoying much speaking and much laughing."
The afternoon was not spent as George had been accustomed to spend it. Light, frivolous conversation, and
still more dangerous debate upon religious subjects, without religious feeling, occupied the time, and George
felt glad when the evening came, and they started off together to hear a popular preacher, whose merits they
had been discussing during the afternoon.
On their way thither they passed a large building, into which several people were entering, and as the outside
of the place was ornamented with handbills, they paused to read them. They ran thus:--
"HALL OF SCIENCE.--A Lecture will be delivered in this Hall on Sunday evening, at half past six, by
Professor Martin, on 'The Uses of Reason.' Young men are cordially invited to attend.
"What is truth? Search and see."
"Do you know anything of this Professor Martin?" asked Dixon. "Is he worth hearing?"
"A friend of mine told me he had heard him, a little while ago, and was never better pleased with any lecture,"
Ashton answered. "Shall we put up here for the evening?"
"Is he a preacher, or a mere lecturer?" asked George. The question attracted the attention of a person entering
the Hall; and, turning to George, he answered:--
"Professor Martin is one of those best of all preachers. He can interest without sending you to sleep, and his
discourses are full of sound wisdom. He is a lover of truth, and advocates the only way to arrive at it, which is
by unfettered thought. In his lectures he puts his theory into practice by freely expressing his unfettered
thoughts. I have seats in the front of the lecture-room; if you will favour me by accepting them, they are at
CHAPTER VI. 36
your service."
The plausible and polite manner of the stranger was effectual with George.
"I don't think we can do better than go in and hear what the lecturer has to say," he said to the others. And,
assent being given, they followed the stranger, and were conducted to the proffered seats.
The audience consisted principally of men, the majority of whom were young and of an inferior class, such as
shopmen and mechanics. There was a large platform, with chairs upon it, but no pulpit or reading-desk. When
the lecturer, accompanied by a chairman and some friends, entered, George and his companions were
surprised to hear a clapping of hands and stamping of feet, similar to the plan adopted at public amusements.
"This does not seem much like a Sunday evening service," said George. "We have time to leave, if you like;
or shall we stay and see it out?"
"Oh! let us stay," replied the others.
No hymn was sung, no prayer was offered at the commencement, but the lecturer, with a pocket Bible in his
hands, quoted a few passages of Scripture, as follows:--
"Come now, and let us reason together,"--Isa. i. 18; "I applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek
out wisdom, and to know the reason of things,"--Eccles. vii. 25; "And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto
them, and three Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures,"--Acts xvii. 2; "Be ready alway to
give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you,"--1 Peter iii. 15.
The object of the lecturer was to show that no intelligent being could receive truth unless that truth
commended itself to reason, because the two were never in opposition one with the other. Conscience, he said,
was the soul's safeguard, and reason the safeguard of the heart and intellect. It was irrational to condemn any
course of conduct which conscience approved, and it was equally irrational to believe anything that could not
be understood. The Word of God might be useful in its way, but only as studied with unfettered thought. If
that Word exalted reason and then taught inconsistencies and absurdities, reason must discriminate between
the right and the wrong. "For example," he continued, "if that book tells me that there are three Gods, and yet
those three are one, I reason by analogy and say, here are three fingers; each one has its particular office; but I
cannot make these three fingers one finger, neither can I make three Gods one God."
So the lecturer continued, but he did not put his case in so many plain words as these; every argument he
clothed with doubtful words, so as to make falsehood look like truth, and blasphemy like worship. He was an
educated and intelligent man, gifted with that dangerous power of preaching the doctrine of devils in the guise
of an angel of light, and handling deadly sophistry with as firm a grasp as if it were the sword of the Spirit.
At the conclusion of the lecture he announced his intention to speak from that platform again on the following
Sunday, and invited all who were inquiring the way of truth to be present, and judge what he said, "whether it
be right, or whether it be wrong."
As George and his friends were leaving the hall, the stranger, who had accosted them before, came up, and
bowing politely said--
"Will you allow me to offer you the same seats, for next Sunday evening? If you will say yes, I will reserve
them for you; otherwise you may have difficulty in obtaining admission, for the room will, in all probability,
be more crowded than to-night, as Professor Martin was not announced to lecture until late in the week, and
the friends who frequent the Hall had no notice of his being here."
CHAPTER VI. 37
"I will certainly come," said Ashton. "I never heard a speaker I liked better. What say you?" he asked, turning
to the others.
"I am anxious to hear the conclusion of the argument," said George; "so we will accept your invitation," he
added to the stranger, "and thank you for your kindness and courtesy."
It was a long conversation the friends had as they strolled along that evening. To George every argument the
lecturer had brought forward was new; and bearing, as they did, the apparent stamp of truth, he was utterly
confounded. Although he was a good biblical scholar, as regarded the historical and narrative parts of the
Scriptures, he was but ill informed on those more subtle points which the lecturer handled. He had never heard
the doctrine of the Trinity, for example, disputed, and had always implicitly believed it; now, when the
lecturer quoted Scripture to prove that truth was to be analysed by reason, and reason rejected the idea of a
Trinity, he was as unable to reconcile the two as if he had never received any religious instruction at all.
"If what he advances be true," said George, "how irrational many things in the Christian religion are! And
how singular that men like him, who 'search into the reason of things' for wisdom, and hold opinions contrary
to the orthodox notions of those whom we call Christians, should be looked upon with suspicion and distrust."
"No," replied Ashton; "he met that idea by saying that it was not more than singular, in the early stages of
science, for people to be burnt as witches and magicians, because they made discoveries which are now
developed and brought into daily use, than it is now for men to be scouted as infidel and profane, because they
teach opinions which only require investigation to make them universally admitted."
An unhappy day was that Sunday for George Weston. He had violated principle, made concessions against the
dictates of conscience (how poor a safeguard for him!) and had learnt lessons which taught him to despise
those instructions which had hitherto been as a lamp unto his feet and a light unto his path.
"Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor
sitteth in the seat of the scornful." George little thought how rapidly he was passing through those different
stages on the downward road. Had he never listened to the council of the ungodly, he would not have walked
in the way of evil, but would have avoided even its very appearance; he would not have stood in the way of
sinners, parleying with temptations, as he had done on so many occasions; nor would he have occupied that
most dangerous of all positions, the fatal ease of sitting in the seat of the scornful.
CHAPTER VI. 38
CHAPTER VII.
GETTING ON IN THE WORLD.
"Mr. Compton wishes to speak with you, Weston," said Mr. Sanders, the manager, to George one morning,
during the visit of Mrs. Weston in the country.
"Good morning, Weston," said Mr. Compton; "I want to have a few minutes' conversation with you: sit down.
You have been in my office now more than a twelvemonth, and I promised that you should have an increased
salary at the expiration of that time. Your services have been very valuable to me during the past year, and I
am in every way satisfied with you. As a tangible proof of this, I beg your acceptance of this little present,"
(handing him a ten-pound note,) "and during this year on which you have entered, I shall have much pleasure
in giving you a salary of two guineas a week."
"I am exceedingly obliged to you sir," George stammered out, for he was flabbergasted at the kindness of his
employer; "I hope I may always continue to do my duty in your office, and deserve your approbation."
"I hope so, too;" said Mr. Compton, "both for your sake and for my own. If you continue as you have begun,
there is a fair field before you, and I will advance you as opportunity occurs. Now, apart from business, I want
one word with you. I kept you purposely last year upon a low salary, because I have found that sometimes it is
beneficial to young men to have only a small income. With your increased salary, you will have increased
means for entering that style of life which is, unfortunately, too universal with young men--I mean the gaieties
and dissipations of a London life are now more open to you than they were before. But what is termed a 'fast'
young man never makes a good clerk, and I do hope you will not allow yourself to fail into habits which will
be obstacles to your future promotion."
"I will endeavour, sir, always to maintain my position in your office," said George; "and I feel very grateful to
you for the interest you take in my personal welfare."
George was in high spirits with his good fortune. He had not expected more than a guinea, or at the utmost
thirty shillings a week increase for his second year, and had never dreamt of receiving so handsome a present
as £10. By that night's post he sent off a long letter to his mother, giving her an account of the interview, and
of his future prospects.
But George had different ideas about his future now, to those he cherished a twelvemonth back. Then he
thought only of himself and his mother; how happy they would be together, and how much he would
endeavour to contribute to her enjoyment. Now he congratulated himself that he would be upon a footing with
his friends, that he could do as they did, and that he had the means to follow up those recreations which were
becoming habitual to him. For since Mrs. Weston had been away, George had gone step by step further on
unhallowed ground. Even Ashton said, "Weston, you are coming it pretty strong, old fellow!" and Hardy had
declared that he could not keep pace with him. Night after night, as he had no one at home to claim his
presence there, he had been to theatres and other places of amusement. Sunday after Sunday he had attended
the lectures at the Hall of Science, and abandoning himself to the tide which was hurrying him along, he
floated down the dangerous stream.
The principles of infidelity which had been inculcated, appealed to him with a voice so loud as to drown the
appeals from a higher source. The one approved his conduct, the other condemned it--the one pointed to the
world as a scene of enjoyment, the other as at enmity with God. George felt that if he would hold one he must
resign the other. He had not that moral courage, or rather he had not the deep-rooted conviction of sin, or the
earnest love and fear of God, to enable him to burst through the entanglements of the world and the world's
god, and choosing whom he would serve: he loved darkness rather than light.
When Mrs. Weston returned, after a month's absence, she could not but observe an alteration in George.
Although he never told her of his attendance at the lectures on Sunday, or the arguments he had had with
friends who held infidel opinions, she soon perceived that George's feelings were undergoing a rapid and
dangerous change. Those subjects on which he was once in the habit of conversing with her, he now carefully
shunned. He was affectionate and kind to his mother still, and loved her with all his old intense love, but that
ingenuous confidence which he had always reposed in her was gone. Things that were dear to him now he
could not discuss with her; instead of telling her how he spent his time, and what were his amusements, he
avoided any mention of them. The deception which he first practised on that night when he yielded to
Ashton's persuasion, was now a system. He reasoned the matter over with himself: there could be no good in
telling her; their opinions were different; he would take his course, independently of hers.
Uncle Brunton noticed the change; for to those who saw him seldom the change was sudden. But to George,
every day there seemed an epoch, and he was unconscious of the rapidity with which old associations and
ideas cherished from childhood were thrown down and trampled upon by the new feelings which had taken
possession of him.
"George," said Mr. Brunton to him one day, "I am growing uneasy about you. I feel that I am not the same to
you, nor you to me, we used to be, only a few months back. I cannot tell the reason--cannot tell when the
difference commenced or how--but for some months past--ever since your mother's visit to the country--there
has been a want of that old confidential, affectionate intercourse between us there used to be."
"I was younger then," said George, "and the freshness of youthful feeling and attachment may die away as we
advance in years; but I am not aware that I have ever given you occasion to say I do not love you sincerely
still, uncle. Your kindness to me never can, and never will be forgotten."
"Well, George, I cannot explain what I mean. I have a kind of feeling about you that something is wrong
which I cannot put into words. I fancy that if I offer you a word of counsel, you do not receive it as you once
did; if I talk seriously with you, it does not make the same impression, or touch the spring of the same
feelings. You do not talk to me with the old frankness and candour which made my heart leap, when I thanked
God I had got some one in the world to love, and who loved me. But perhaps I wrong you, and expect too
much from you."
"No, not that, uncle. Frankness, candour, and love are due to you, and while I have them they shall always be
yours; and to prove it, I will tell what I have never told any one before, what I have hardly spoken to my own
heart. I think of the George Weston you brought away from Dr. Seaward's, who stood with you beside a
father's deathbed, and who, eighteen months ago, went into Mr. Compton's office; then I think of George
Weston of to-day, and I feel amazed at the change a few years has made. I have asked myself a hundred times,
am I really the same? Oh, uncle! you do not know what I would give to be that boy again--to live once more
in that old world of sunshine."
Tears started to George's eyes as he spoke, and Mr. Brunton could only squeeze his hand, and say, "God bless
you, my boy! God bless you!"
A few days later Mr. Brunton and Mrs. Weston were one whole evening together talking about George. Both
hearts were heavy, but Mr. Brunton's was the lighter of the two.
"I tell you what I think will be the very best thing for you and for George," he said, "It is now the early spring,
and the country is beginning to look fresh and green. Leave this house and take one in the country. I think
George can easily be made to accede to this proposition--he was always fond of country life and recreations.
He can have a season ticket on the railway, and come down every night. This will wean him from his
associates, and induce him to keep earlier hours, and give us, too, a better opportunity to lure him back to his
old habits of life."
The arrangements were made. Mrs. Weston, with that loving self-denial which only a mother can exercise,
gave up the house, and her circle of friends, and took up her residence in the country, about twenty miles from
London. George was pleased with the change, and acquiesced in all the plans which were made.
About this time, an event happened of considerable importance in the family history. An old relative of Mrs.
Weston's, from whom she had monetary expectations, died; and upon examination of the will, it was found
that a legacy had been left her of about three thousand pounds, which was safely invested, and would bring to
her an income of nearly a hundred and fifty pounds a year.
This was a cause of fear and rejoicing to Mrs. Weston--fear, lest it should be a snare to George, as he would
now have the whole of his salary at his own disposal, there being no longer any necessity for her to share it;
rejoicing, that she should be able to give him that start in life which had always been the desire and ambition
of Mr. Weston.
A few months' trial of Mr. Brunton's plan for weaning George from the allurements of society in London, by
taking a house in the country, proved it to be a failure. For the first month, George went down almost
immediately after leaving business, but it was only for the first month. Gradually it became later and later,
until the last train was generally the one by which he travelled. Then it sometimes occurred that he lost the last
train, and was obliged to stay at an hotel in town for the night. At length, this occurred so frequently, that
sometimes for three nights out of the week he never went home at all. On one of these occasions, a party of
gentlemen in the commercial room of the hotel where he was staying proposed a game of cards, and asked
George to make one at a rubber of whist. George had often played with his own friends, but never before with
total strangers. However, without any hesitation, he accepted the invitation, and yielded to the proposition that
they should play sixpenny points. The game proceeded, rubber after rubber was lost and won, and when
George rose from the card-table at a late hour he was loser to the amount of thirty shillings.
"There is no playing against good cards," said George; "and the run of luck has been in your favour to-night;
but I will challenge you to another game to-morrow evening, if you will be here?"
The next night George played again, and won back a pound of the money he had lost on the preceding
evening. This was encouraging. "One more trial," said George to himself, "and nobody will catch me
card-playing for money again with strangers." But that one more trial was the worst of all. George lost three
pounds! He could ill afford it; as it was he was living at the very extent of his income, and three pounds was a
large sum. He was obliged to give an I O U for the amount, and in the meantime borrow the sum from one of
his friends.
"Hardy, have you got three pounds to lend me?" he asked, next morning; "you shall have it again to-morrow."
"I have not got that sum with me," said Hardy, "but I can get it for you. Is it pressing?"
"Yes; I had a hand at cards last night, and lost."
"What! with Ashton?"
"No; with some strangers at the hotel where I have hung out for the last night or two."
"You shall have that sum early this evening, George; and twice that amount, if you will make me one promise.
I ask it as an old friend, who has a right to beg a favour. Give up card-playing, don't try to win back what you
have lost; no good can possibly come of it"
"Is Saul among the prophets?" asked George, with something like a sneer.
CHAPTER VII. 41
"No, George Weston: but a looker-on at chess sees more of the game than the player; and I have been looking
at your last few moves in the game of life, without taking part with you, and I see you will be checkmated
soon, if you do not alter your tactics. I can't blame you, nor do I wish to, if I could; but when I first heard you
had taken to card playing, I did feel myself among the prophets then, and prophesied no good would come of
it."
"When you first heard of my card playing?" asked George. "When did you hear of it?"
"A few days since. My father came up from the country by a late train one night, and stayed at the hotel you
patronize. There he saw you, and told me about it."
"Confound it! a fellow can't do a thing, even in this great city, without somebody ferretting it out. But I don't
mean to play again. I have made a fool of myself too many times already; and it serves me right that I have
lost money."
That evening, while George was making his way to the hotel, a lady was journeying towards the railway
station. An hour later, she was at the house of Mrs. Weston, and was shown into the drawing-room.
"I must apologise," said Mrs. Hardy, for it was she, "in calling upon you at this hour: but I am very anxious to
have some conversation with you."
"It is strange," said Mrs. Weston, "that as our sons have been intimate so long, we should have continued
strangers; but I am very delighted to see you, Mrs. Hardy, for I have heard much of you."
"It is with regard to the intercourse between your son and mine that I have called. I do not wish to alarm you;
but I feel it right that you should be in possession of information I have of your son."
Mrs. Hardy then narrated the circumstances connected with her husband's visit to the hotel on the evening
when he found George there card playing.
"This evening," she continued, "my son returned home earlier than usual, and went to his drawer, where I saw
him take out some money--two or three sovereigns. I asked him what he was going to do with it, and after
some difficulty I ascertained he intended lending it to your son. It occurred to me at once that George Weston
was in trouble with those men; and I thought it only right that you should know."
It was kind of Mrs. Hardy to shew this interest, and Mrs. Weston esteemed her for it. But had they stood
beside the table at which George was seated while they were talking, or could they have seen the flush of
excitement as he threw down the cards, exclaiming, "By Jove! I've lost again!" and have watched the flashing
eye and heaving breast, they would have felt, even more keenly than they did, how futile were words or
sympathies to check the evil.
CHAPTER VII. 42
CHAPTER VIII.
A TEST OF FRIENDSHIP.
We pass over two years of George Weston's life--years full of strange experiences--and look into the office in
Falcon-court one morning in the summer of 18--.
Mr. Compton is away on the Continent for a holiday tour, Mr. Sanders is still the manager, and nearly all the
same old faces are in the office. George, who is now verging on the legal age of manhood, has risen to a good
position in the establishment, and is regarded as second only to Mr. Sanders. He is wonderfully altered from
when we saw him first in that office. He is still handsome; but the old sparkling lustre of his eye has gone, and
no trace of boyishness is left.
Hardy is still there. Two years have not made so much difference in him as George. He looks older than he
really is; but there is no mistaking him for the quiet, gentlemanly Charles Hardy of former days. Lawson and
Williams are there, coarse and bloated young men, whose faces tell the history of their lives. Hardy rarely
exchanges a word with them. George does more frequently, but not with the air of superiority he once did.
A close observer would have noticed in George that morning a careworn anxious look; would have heard an
occasional sigh, and have seen him at one time turning pale, and again flushing with a crimson red.
"You are not well," said Hardy. "You have not done a stroke of work all this morning; quite an unusual thing
for you, George."
"I am not well," he replied; "but it is nothing of importance. I shall get Mr. Sanders to let me off for an hour's
stroll when he comes in from the Bank."
Mr. Sanders came in from the Bank, but he was later than usual. His round generally occupied an hour; this
morning he had been gone between two and three. George watched him anxiously as he took off his hat,
rubbed his nose violently with his pocket handkerchief, and stood gazing into the fire, ejaculating every now
and then, as was his custom if anything extraordinary or disagreeable had happened, "Ah! umph!"
"The old boy has found out that the wind has veered to the northeast, or has stepped upon some orange peel,"
whispered Lawson to Williams, who saw that something had gone wrong with the manager.
"Your proposed stroll will be knocked on the head," said Hardy to George. "Mr. Sanders is evidently in an ill
humour."
"I shall not trouble him about it," said George; "shirking work always worries him, and he seems to be
worried enough as it is."
When Mr. Sanders had gazed in the fire for half an hour, and had walked once or twice up and down the
office, as his manner was on such occasions, he turned to George and said, "I want to speak with you in the
next room."
"I wish you a benefit, Weston," said Williams as he passed. "Recommend him a day or two in the country, for
the good of his health and our happiness."
"Mr. Weston," said the manager, when George had shut the door and seated himself, "I am in great
difficulties. This event has happened at a most unfortunate time, Mr. Compton is away, and I don't know how
to act for the best. Will you give me your assistance in the matter?"
CHAPTER VIII. 43
"Cannot you make the accounts right, sir?" asked George. "I thought you had satisfactorily arranged them last
night."
"No, Weston; I have been through them over and over again, but I cannot get any nearer to a balance. I have
been round to the Bank this morning again, and have seen Mr. Smith about it, but he cannot assist me.
However, inquiries will be made this afternoon, and all our accounts carefully checked and examined; in the
meantime, I wish you would have out the books and go through them for me. Hardy can assist you, if you
like."
"I will do all I can for you, to make this matter right," said George; "but I can do it better alone. If you will
give Hardy the job I was about, I will check the books here by myself."
All that afternoon George sat alone in Mr. Compton's room surrounded with books and papers. But he did not
examine them. Resting his head upon his hands, he looked upon them and sighed. Now the perspiration stood
in big drops upon his forehead and his hands trembled. Then he would walk up and down the room, halting to
take deep draughts of water from a bottle on the table.
Mr. Sanders occasionally looked in to ask how he was going on, and if he had discovered the error.
"No," said George; "the accounts seem right; but I cannot make them agree with the cash-book. There is still a
hundred pounds short; but I will go through them again if you like."
"Perhaps you had better. I expect Mr. Smith here by six o'clock; will you remain with me and see him? He
may assist us."
