London's Underworld
But before that day fully comes, let me implore the women of the upper world to be just if not generous to the
women below. Let me ask them not to exact all their labours, nor to allow the extremities of their sisters to be
a reason for under-payment when useful service is rendered. Again I say, and I say it with respect and sorrow,
that many women are thoughtless if not unjust in their business dealings with other women.
I am more concerned for the industrial and social rights of women than I am for their political rights; votes
they may have if you please. But by all that is merciful let us give them justice! For the oppression of women,
whether by women or men, means a perpetuation of the underworld with all its sorrows and horrors; and the
under-payment of women has a curse that smites us all the way round.
And if a word of mine can reach the toiling sisters in the netherworld, I would say to them: Be hopeful!
Patient I know you to be! enduring you certainly are! brave beyond expression I have found you. Now add to
your virtues, hope!
For you have need of it, and you have cause for it. I rejoice that so many of you are personally known to me!
You and I, my sisters, have had much communion, and many happy times together; for sometimes we have
had surcease from toil and a breath of God's fresh air together.
Be hopeful! endure a little longer; for a new spirit walks this old world to bless it, and to right your
long-continued wrongs.
Oh! how you have suffered, sisters mine! and while I have been writing this chapter you have all been around
me. But you are the salt of the underworld; you are much better than the ten just men that were not found in
Sodom. And when for the underworld the day of redemption arrives, it will be you, my sisters, the simple, the
suffering, enduring women that will have hastened it!
So I dwell upon the good that is in the netherworld, in the sure and certain hope, whether my feeble words and
life help forward the time or not, that the day is not far distant when the dead shall rise! When justice, light
and sweetness will prevail, and in prevailing will purify the unexplored depths of the sad underworld.
I offer no apology for inserting the following selections from London County Council proceedings. Neither do
I make any comment, other than to say that the statements made present matters in a much too favourable
light.
CHAPTER II 21
"LONDON'S CHILD SLAVES
"OVERWORK AND BAD NUTRITION
"Disclosures in L.C.C. Report.
(From the Daily Press, December 1911)
"The comments passed by members of the L.C.C. at the Education Committee meeting upon the annual report
of the medical officer of that committee made it clear that many very interesting contents of the report had not
been made public.
"The actual report, which we have now seen, contains much more that deserves the serious attention of all
who are interested in the problem of the London school child.
"There is, for example, a moving page on child life in a north- west poverty area, where, among other
conditions, it is not uncommon to find girls of ten doing a hard day's work outside their school work; they are
the slaves of their mothers and grandmothers.
"The great amount of anaemia and malnutrition among the children in this area (says the report) is due to
poverty, with its resultant evils of dirt, ill-feeding and under-feeding, neglect and female labour.
"Cheap food.--The necessity for buying cheap food results in the purchasing of foodstuffs which are deficient
in nutrient properties. The main articles of diet are indifferent bread and butter, the fag ends of coarse meat,
the outside leaves of green vegetables, and tea, and an occasional pennyworth of fried fish and potatoes.
Children who are supplied with milk at school, or who are given breakfast and dinner, respond at once to the
better feeding, and show distinct improvement in their class work. The unemployment among the men obliges
the women to seek for work outside the home, and the under-payment of female labour has its effect upon the
nutrition of the family.
"'Investigation in the senior departments of one school showed that 144 children were being supported by
their mothers only, 57 were living on their sisters, 68 upon the joint earnings of elder brothers and sisters,
while another 130 had mothers who went out to work in order to supplement the earnings of the father.
"'Approximately one-third of the children in this neighbourhood are supported by female labour. With the
mother at work the children rapidly become neglected, the boys get out of control, they play truant, they learn
to sleep out, and become known to the police while they are still in the junior mixed department.'
"The Girl Housewife.--The maintenance of the home, the cooking and catering, is done by an elderly girl who
sometimes may not be more than ten years of age. The mother's earnings provide bread and tea for the family
and pay the rent, but leave nothing over for clothing or boots.
"Many of the boys obtain employment out of school hours, for which they are paid and for which they may
receive food; others learn to hang about the gasworks and similar places, and get scraps of food and halfpence
from the workmen. In consequence they may appear to be better nourished than the girls 'who work beyond
their strength at domestic work, step cleaning, baby minding, or carrying laundry bundles and running
errands.' For this labour they receive no remuneration, since it is done for the family.
"A remarkable paragraph of the report roundly declares--
"'The provision generally at cost price of school meals for all who choose to pay for them would be a national
economy, which would do much to improve the status of the feeding centres and the standard of feeding. This
CHAPTER II 22
principle is applied most successfully in schools of a higher grade, and might well be considered in connection
with the ordinary elementary schools of the Council. Such a provision would probably be of the greatest
benefit to the respectable but very poor, who are too proud to apply for charity meals, and whose children are
often penalised by want, and the various avoidable defects or ailments that come in its train.'
"Feeding wanted.--Of the children of a Bethnal Green school, the school doctor is quoted as reporting that 'it
was not hospital treatment but feeding that was wanted.'
"Among curious oddments of information contained in the report, it is mentioned that the children of widows
generally show superior physique.
"The teeth are often better in children from the poorer homes, 'perhaps from use on rougher food materials
which leaves less DEBRIS to undergo fermentation.'
"'Children of poorer homes also often have the advantage of the fresh air of the streets, whilst the better-off
child is kept indoors and becomes flabby and less resistant to minor ailments. The statistics of infantile
mortality suggest that the children of the poorer schools have also gone through a more severe selection;
disease weeding out by natural selection, and the less fit having succumbed before school age, the residue are
of sturdier type than in schools or classes where such selection has been less intense.'"
CHAPTER III
THE NOMADS
A considerable portion of the inhabitants of the world below the line are wanderers, without home, property,
work or any visible means of existence. For twenty years it has been the fashion to speak of them as the
"submerged," and a notable philanthropist taught the public to believe that they formed one-tenth of our
population.
It was currently reported in the Press that the philanthropist I have referred to offered to take over and salve
this mass of human wreckage for the sum of one million pounds. His offer was liberally responded to;
whether he received the million or not does not matter, for he has at any rate been able to call to his assistance
thousands of men and women, and to set them to work in his own peculiar way to save the "submerged."
From a not unfriendly book just published, written by one who was for more than twenty years intimately
associated with him, and one of the chief directors of his salvage work, we learn that the result has largely
been a failure.
To some of us this failure had been apparent for many years, and though we hoped much from the movement,
we could not close our eyes to facts, and reluctantly had to admit that the number of the "submerged" did not
appreciably lessen.
True, shelters, depots, bridges, homes and labour homes were opened with astonishing celerity. Wood was
chopped and paper sorted in immense quantities, but shipwrecked humanity passed over bridges that did not
lead to any promised land, and abject humanity ascended with the elevators that promptly lowered them to
depths on the other side.
Stimulated by the apparent success or popularity of the Salvation Army, the Church Army sprang into
existence, and disputed with the former the claim to public patronage, and the right to save! It adopted similar
means, it is certain with similar results, for the "submerged" are still with us.
CHAPTER III 23
I say that both these organisations pursued the same methods and worked practically on the same lines, for
both called into their service a number of enthusiastic young persons, clothed them in uniforms, horribly
underpaid them, and set them to work to save humanity and solve social and industrial problems, problems for
which wiser and more experienced people fail to find a solution. It would be interesting to discover what has
become of the tens of thousands of enthusiastic men and women who have borne the uniform of these
organisations for periods longer or shorter, and who have disappeared from the ranks.
How many of them are "submerged" I cannot say, but I know that some have been perilously near it.
I am persuaded that this is a dangerous procedure, very dangerous procedure, and the subscribing public has
some right to ask what has become of all the "officers" who, drawn from useful work to these organisations,
have disappeared.
But as a continual recruiting keeps up the strength, the subscribing public does not care to ask, for the public
is quite willing to part with its vested interests in human wreckage. All this leads me to say once more that the
"submerged" are still with us. Do you doubt it? Then come with me; let us take a midnight walk on the
Thames Embankment; any night will do, wet or dry, winter or summer!
Big Ben is striking the hour as we commence our walk at Blackfriars; we have with us a sack of food and a
number of second-hand overcoats. The night is cold, gusty and wet, and we think of our warm and
comfortable beds and almost relinquish our expedition. The lights on Blackfriars Bridge reveal the murky
waters beneath, and we see that the tide is running out.
We pass in succession huge buildings devoted to commerce, education, religion and law; we pass beautiful
gardens, and quickly we arrive at the Temple. The lamps along the roadway give sufficient light for our
purpose, for they enable us to see that here and there on the seats and in the recesses of the Embankment are
strange beings of both sexes.
Yonder are two men, unkempt and unshaven, their heads bent forward and their hands thrust deep into their
trousers pockets and, to all appearance, asleep.
Standing in a sheltered corner of the Temple Station we see several other men, who are smoking short pipes
which they replenish from time to time with bits of cigars and cigarettes that they have gathered during the
day from the streets of London.
I know something of the comedy and tragedy of cigar ends, for times and again I have seen a race and almost
a struggle for a "fat end" when some thriving merchant has thrown one into the street or gutter. Suddenly
emerging from obscurity and showing unexpected activity, two half-naked fellows have made for it; I have
seen the satisfaction of the fellow who secured it, and I have heard the curse of the disappointed; but there! at
any time, on any day, near the Bank, or the Mansion House, in Threadneedle Street, or in Cheapside such
sights may be seen by those who have eyes to see.
These two fellows have been successful, for they are assuaging the pangs of hunger by smoking their odds
and ends. They look at us as we pass to continue our investigation. Here on a seat we find several men of
motley appearance; one is old and bent, his white beard covers his chest, he has a massive head, he is a
picturesque figure, and would stand well for a representation of Old Father Thames, for the wet streams from
his hair, his beard and his ample moustache. Beside him sits a younger man, weak and ill. His worn clothing
tells us of better days, and we instinctively realise that not much longer will he sit out the midnight hours on
the cold Embankment.
Before we distribute our clothes and food, we continue our observation. What strikes us most is the silence,
for no one speaks to us, no hand is held out for a gift, no requests are made for help.
CHAPTER III 24
They look at us unconcernedly as we pass; they appear to bear their privations with indifference or
philosophy. Yonder is a woman leaning over the parapet looking into the mud and water below; we speak to
her, and she turns about and faces us. Then we realise that Hood's poem comes into our mind; we offer her a
ticket for a "shelter," which she declines; we offer her food, but she will have none of it; she asks us to leave
her, and we pass on.
Here is a family group, father and mother with two children; their attire and appearance tell us that they are
tramps; the mother has a babe close to her breast, and round it she has wrapt her old shawl; a boy of five sits
next to her, and the father is close up.
The parents evidently have been bred in vagrancy, and the children, and, unless the law intervenes, their
children are destined to continue the species. The whining voice of the woman and the outstretched hands of
the boy let us know that they are eager and ready for any gift that pity can bestow.
But we give nothing, and let me say that after years of experience, I absolutely harden my heart and close my
pocket against the tramping beggar that exploits little children. And to those who drag children, droning out
hymns through our quiet streets on Sunday, my sympathies extend to a horsewhip.
We leave the tramps, and come upon a poor shivering wretch of about thirty-five years; his face presents
unmistakable signs of disease more loathsome than leprosy; he is not fit to live, he is not fit to die; he is an
outcast from friends, kindred and home. He carries his desolation with him, and the infirmary or the river will
be the end of him.
Here are two stalwart fellows, big enough and strong enough to do useful work in the world. But they are
fresh from prison, and will be back in prison before long; they know us, for it is not the first time we have
made their acquaintance.
They are by no means backward in speaking and telling us that they want "just ten shillings to buy stock in
Houndsditch which they can sell in Cheapside." As we move away they beg insistently for "just a few
shillings; they don't want to get back to prison."
Now we come to a youth of eighteen; he seems afraid, and looks at us with suspicious eyes; what is he doing
here? We are interested in him, so young, yet alone on the Embankment. We open our bag and offer him food,
which he accepts and eats; as we watch him our pity increases: he is thinly clad, and the night air is damp and
cold; we select an old coat, which he puts on. Then we question him, and he tells us that his mother is dead,
his father remarried; that his stepmother did not like him, and in consequence his father turned him out; that
he cannot get work. And so on; a common story, no originality about it, and not much truth!
We suddenly put the question, "How long have you lived in lodging-houses?" "About three years, sir." "What
did you work at?" "Selling papers in the streets." "Anything else?" "No, sir." "You had not got any lodging
money to-night.?" "No." "Ever been in prison?" "Only twice." "What for?" "Gambling in the streets," and we
leave him, conscious that he is neither industrious, honest nor truthful.
We come at length to Waterloo Bridge, and here in the corners and recesses of the steps we find still more of
the submerged, and a pitiful lot they are.
We look closely at them, and we see that some are getting back to primeval life, and that some are little more
than human vegetables. We know that their chief requirements are food, sleep and open air; and that given
these their lives are ideal, to themselves! But we distribute our food amongst them, we part with our last old
coat, we give tickets for free shelters, but we get no thanks, and we know well enough that the shelter tickets
will not be used, for it is much easier for philosophic vagabondage to remain curled up where it is than to
struggle on to a shelter.
CHAPTER III 25
So we leave them, and with a feeling of hopelessness hurry home to our beds.
But let us revisit the Embankment by day at 11 a.m. We take our stand right close to Cleopatra's Needle; we
see that numbers of wretched people, male and female, are already there, and are forming themselves into a
queue three deep, the males taking the Westminster side of the Needle, the females the City side.
While this regiment of a very dolorous army is gathering together, and forming silently and passively into the
long queue, we look at the ancient obelisk, and our mind is carried backward to the days of old, when the old
stone stood in the pride of its early life, and with its clear-cut hieroglyphics spoke to the wonderful people
who comprised the great nation of antiquity.
We almost appeal to it, and feel that we would like to question it, as it stands pointing heavenwards beside our
great river. Surely the ancient stone has seen some strange sights, and heard strange sounds in days gone by.
Involuntarily we ask whether it has seen stranger sights, and heard more doleful sounds than the sights to be
seen under its shadow to-day, and the sounds to be heard around it by night. Could it speak, doubtless it would
tell of the misery, suffering, slavery endured by the poor in Egypt thousands of years ago. Maybe it would tell
us that the great empire of old had the same difficulties to face and the same problems to solve that Great
Britain is called upon to face and to solve to-day.
For the poor cried for bread in the days of the Pharaohs, and they were crowded into unclean places, but even
then great and gorgeous palaces were built.
"Can you tell us, Ancient Stone, has there been an onward march of good since that day? Are we much better,
wiser, happier and stronger than the dusky generations that have passed away?" But we get no response from
the ancient stone, as grim and silent it stands looking down upon us. So we turn to the assembled crowd. See
how it has grown whilst we have been speculating. Silently, ceaselessly over the various bridges, or through
the various streets leading from the Strand they have come, and are still coming.
There is no firm footstep heard amongst them as they shufflingly take their places. No eager expectation is
seen on any face, but quietly, indifferently, without crushing, elbowing, they join the tail-end of the
procession and stand silently waiting for the signal that tells them to move.
Let us walk up and down to count them, for it is nearly twelve o'clock, and at twelve o'clock the slow march
begins. So we count them by threes, and find five hundred men to the right and one hundred women to the
left, all waiting, silently waiting! Stalwart policemen are there to keep order, but their services are not
required.
In the distance the whirl of London's traffic raises its mighty voice; nearer still, the passing tramcars thunder
along, and the silence of the waiting crowd is made more apparent by these contrasts.
Big Ben booms the hour! it is twelve o'clock! and the slow march begins; three by three they slowly approach
the Needle, and each one is promptly served with a small roll of bread and a cup of soup; as each one receives
the bread and soup he steps out of the ranks, promptly and silently drinks his soup, and returns the cup. Rank
follows rank till every one is served, then silently and mysteriously the crowd melts away and disappears. The
police go to other duties, the soup barrows are removed; the grim ancient stone stands once more alone.
But a few hours later, even as Big Ben is booming six, the "Miserables" will be again waiting, silently waiting
for the rolls of bread and the cups of soup, and having received them will again mysteriously disappear, to go
through the same routine at twelve o'clock on the morrow. Aye! and to return on every morrow when soup
and rolls are to be had.
CHAPTER III 26
It looks very pitiful, this mass of misery. It seems very comforting to know that they are fed twice a day with
rolls and soup, but after all the matter wants looking at very carefully, and certain questions must be asked.
Who are these miserables? How comes it that they are so ready to receive as a matter of course the doles of
food provided for them? Are they really helped, and is their position really improved by this kind of charity? I
venture to say no! I go farther, and I say very decidedly that so long as the bulk of these people can get food
twice a day, and secure some kind of shelter at night, they will remain content to be as they are. I will go still
farther and say, that if this provision becomes permanent the number of the miserables will increase, and the
Old Needle will continue to look down on an ever-growing volume of poverty and wretchedness.
For after receiving the soup and bread, these nomads disappear into the streets and by-ways of London, there
by hook or crook, by begging or other means, to secure a few coppers, to pick up scraps of food, and to return
to the Embankment.
I have walked up and down the Embankment, I have looked searchingly at the people assembled. Some of
them I have recognised as old acquaintances; many of them, I know, have no desire to be other than what they
are. To eat, to sleep, to have no responsibility, to be free to live an uncontrolled life, are their ambitions; they
have no other. Some of them are young men, only twenty years of age, who have seen the inside of prison
again and again. Some of them are older, who have tramped the country in the summer time and have been
drawn to London by the attraction of an easy feeding in the winter. Search their ranks! and you will find very
little genuine, unfortunate, self- respecting poverty. They are what they are, and unless other means are
adopted they will, remain what they are!
And so they will eat the bread and drink the soup; they will come at twelve o'clock noon; they will come at six
o'cIock in the evening. They will sleep where they can, and to-morrow will be as to-day; and the next day as
to-morrow, unless some compulsion is applied to them.
All this is very sad, but I venture to say it is true, and it seems to be one of the evils almost inseparable from
our present life. Probably in every clime and every age such women and men have existed. The savage lives
in all of us, and the simple life has its attractions. To be free of responsibility is, no doubt, a natural aspiration.
But when I see how easy it is for this class of people to obtain food, when I see how easy it is for them to
obtain shelter, when I see and know how thousands of the poor are unceasingly at work in order to provide a
modicum of food and the semblance of a shelter, then it occurs to me, and I am sure it will to any one who
thinks seriously upon the matter, that these men and women, who are harking back to the life of the idle
savage, are treated better in Christian England than the industrious, self-respecting but unfortunate poor. But
come with me to see another sight! It is again afternoon, and we take our stand at 3.30 p.m. outside a shelter
for women which every night receives, for fourpence each, some hundreds of submerged women.
The doors will not be opened till six o'clock, so we are in time to watch them as they arrive to take their places
in the waiting queue. A policeman is present to preserve order and keep the pavement clear; but his service is
not required, for the women are very orderly, and allow plenty of room for passers-by.
As the time for opening approaches, the number of waiting women increases until there is a waiting silent
crowd. No photograph could give the slightest idea of their appearance, for dirt and misery are not revealed by
photography.
Let us look at them, for the human eye sees most! What do we see? Squalor, vice, misery, dementia, feeble
minds and feeble bodies. Old women on the verge of the grave eating scraps of food gathered from the City
dustbins. Dirty and repulsive food, dirty and repulsive women! who have begged during the day enough
coppers to pay for their lodging by night. Girls of twenty, whose conduct in their homes has been outrageous,
and whose life in London must be left to imagination. Middle-aged women, outcasts, whose day has past, but
who have still capabilities for begging and stealing. The whole company presents an altogether terrible
CHAPTER III 27
picture, and we are conscious that few of the women have either the ability or the desire to render decent
service to the community, or to live womanly lives.
At length the door opens, and we watch them pass silently in, to sleep during the night in the boxes arranged
on the floors, their bodies unwashed, and their clothing unchanged. Happy are such women when some
trumpery theft lands them in prison, for there at any rate a change of clothing is provided, and a bath is
compulsory.
If we stand outside a men's shelter, we see a similar state of things, a waiting crowd. A passive, content,
strange mixed lot of humans. Some of them who have been well educated, but are now reaping the harvest
that follows the sowing of wild oats. The submerged males are, on the whole, less repulsive than the women;
dirt is less in evidence, and they exhibit a better standard of health. But many of them are harking back to
nature, and remind us of the pictures we have seen of primeval man.
I want to say a few words about the submerged that congregate on the Thames Embankment, and the
humanity we have seen enter the cheap shelters.
My experience has shown me that they constitute the lowest grade and the least hopeful class of the
submerged. Amongst them there are very few decent and helpable men and women who are capable of rising
to a higher life. Say what we will, be as pitiful as we may, those of us who have much experience of life know
perfectly well that there exists a large class of persons who are utterly incapable of fulfilling the duties of
decent citizenship. It may be that they are wicked, and it is certain that they are weak, but whether wicked or
weak, they have descended by the law of moral gravitation and have found their level in the lowest depths of
civilised life.
And they come from unexpected quarters, for some who have known comfort and refinement are now quite
content with their present conditions. Whether born of refined parents, or of rude and ignorant parents,
whether coming from a tramping stock, or from settled home life, they have one thing in common. It is this--
the life they live has a powerful attraction for them; they could not if they would, and would not if they could,
live lives that demand decency, discipline and industry. Nothing but compulsion will ever induce them to
submit themselves to disciplined life. But let it be clearly understood that I am now speaking only of the
lowest class of the submerged. While my experience has taught me that they, humanly speaking, are a
hopeless lot, I have learned that they have their qualities. They can endure if they cannot work; they can suffer
if they cannot strive. After all I am persuaded that they get a fair amount of happiness. Simple pleasures are
the greatest, perhaps the only real pleasures. We all like to be free of responsibilities. There is no rent-day
coming round with dread certainty and irritating monotony to the nomads. No rate collector irritates them with
his imperious "demand note." No school-board officer rouses them to a sense of duty by his everlasting efforts
to force their children to school. No butcher, no baker, no milkman duns them for payment of bills long
overdue! They escape the danger of furniture on the "hire system." For them no automatic gas meter
grudgingly doles out its niggardly pennyworths of gas. They are not implored to burden themselves with the
ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA.
They are free from the seductions of standard bread; paper-bag cookery causes them no anxious thought. Even
"sweet peas" do not enter into their simple calculations. Finally no life assurance agent marks them for his
prey, and no income-tax tempts them to lie! From all these things they are free, and I would like to know who
would not wish to be free of them and a thousand other worries I would escape them if I could, but alas I
cannot.
Decidedly there is much to be said for the life of a nomad, but whether or not I should place him among the
inhabitants of the underworld I am not sure; for he toils not, neither does he spin, and his bitterest enemies
cannot accuse him of taking thought for the morrow. I had almost forgotten one great advantage he possesses:
he need not wash; and when this distasteful operation becomes, for sanitary reasons, absoluteIy necessary,
CHAPTER III 28
why then he can take a month in one of our great sanatoria, either prison or workhouse will do, and be
thoroughly cleansed!
The idea of such free and easy folk being saved by a shelter and wood-chopping is very funny.
But we are all tramps, more or less; it is only a question of degree! Who would not like to tramp with George
Borrow through Spain or Wales I would like the chance! Who does not feel and hear the "call of the wild"?
Most certainly all Britons thrill with it. Who does not like to feel the "wind on the heath" beat on his face and
fill his nostrils! Who does not love the sweetness of country lanes, or the solitude of mountains, or the
whispering mystery of the wood, or the terrors of the sea, or the silence of midnight?
All these things are ingrained in us, part and parcel of our very selves; we cannot get away from them if we
would, and woe betide us if we did! For this is a grand quality in itself, one that has made our nation and our
empire. But couple it with idleness, inertia, feebleness, weak minds, and weaker bodies; why, then you get the
complete article, the vegetable human! the guinea-pig man; if you will, the "submerged," or at any rate a
portion of them.
Originally I have no doubt the human family were nomads, and many of our good old instincts still survive,
but civilisation has killed others. In every cross-bred species of animals or plants there are "reverts" or
"throwbacks," and the human family produces plenty of them. Every civilised country has its "throwbacks,"
and the more monotonous civilisation becomes, the more cast-iron its rules, and the more scientific and
educated its people, the more onerous and difficult become the responsibilities and duties of citizenship; and
the greater the likelihood of in increased number of reverts to undisciplined and wild life. In this direction the
sea and our colonies are the safeguard of England. But to-day we pay in meal or malt for our civilisation, for
many brave lads, with thews and muscles, are chafing, fretting and wearing out their hearts in dull London
offices or stores, where they feel choked, hampered, cabined and confined, for civilisation chains them to their
desks.
But I am wandering too! I will hark back. Another cause, and a fruitful cause, of nomadic life is to be found in
the ever- increasing number of young incapables that our present-day life produces. Characterless,
backboneless, negative kind of fellows with neither wisdom nor stature abound. Up to eighteen years they
pass muster, but after that age they are useless; in reality they need caring for all their lives. They possess no
initiative, no self-reliance, and little capability for honest work, unless it be simple work done under close
supervision. Our industrial life is too strenuous for these young men; they are laggards in life's race, they
quickly fall behind, and ultimately become disqualified altogether.
Many of their parents refuse them shelter, the streets become their home; absolute idleness supervenes; their
day is past. Henceforward they are lodging-house habitues, or wanderers on the face of the earth.
More pitiable still is the case of those that may be classed as feeble-minded, and who are just responsible
enough to be quite irresponsible. Idiots and imbeciles have largely disappeared from country villages and
small towns. They are well taken care of, for our large asylums are full of them; they have good quarters,
good food, every attention, so they live long in the land.
But the case is very different with the half imbeciles or the half mad. Short terms of imprisonment with short
periods of hopeless, useless liberty and an occasional spell in the workhouse constitute the circle of their lives;
and a vicious circle it is. Can any life be more pitiable? Sane enough to know that they are not quite sane,
insane enough to have no wish to control their animal or vicious instincts. Possessing no education, strength
or skill, of no possible use in industrial life, with no taste for decency or social life; sleeping by day in our
parks,and by night upon the Embankment. But they mate; and as like meets with like the result may be
imagined! Here again we are paying for our neglect of many serious matters. Bad housing, overcrowding,
incessant work by the mothers whilst bearing children, drinking habits among the parents, insufficient food
CHAPTER III 29
for the children, endless anxieties and worries. All these things and more amongst that portion of the nation
which produces the largest families; what wonder that many incapable bodies and minds result!
But if civilisation allows all this, civilisation must pay the penalty, which is not a light one, and continue to
have the miserables upon the Embankment.
Have we no pity! no thought for the next generation, no concern for ourselves! No! I do not recommend a
lethal chamber, but I do strongly advise permanent detention and segregation for these low types of
unfortunate humanity. Nothing less will avail, and expensive though it might be for a time, it would pay in the
near future, and would be at once an act of mercy and justice.
Yes, on the Thames Embankment extremes meet, the ages are bridged over, for the products of our up-to-date
civilisation stand side by side with the products of primeval habits and nomadic life.
CHAPTER IV
LODGING-HOUSES
The inmates of the underworld lodging-houses are a queer and heterogeneous lot; but they are much to be
preferred to the sleepers out; because rascally though many of them are, there is a good deal of self-reliance
and not a little enterprise amongst them. By hook and crook, and, it is to be feared, mostly by crook, they
obtain sufficient money for food and lodging, and to this extent they are an improvement upon the sleepers
out. They have, too, some pluck, perseverance and talents that, rightly applied, might be of considerable
benefit to the community. But having got habituated to the liberty of common lodging-houses, and to the
excitement of getting day by day just enough for each day's need, though sometimes fasting and sometimes
feasting, the desire for settled home life and for the duties of citizenship has vanished. For with the money to
pay night by night for their lodgings, responsibility to rent and tax collector ends.
I must allow some exceptions, for once every year there comes upon thousands of them the burden of finding
five shillings to pay for the hawker's licence that provides them with the semblance of a living, or an excuse
for begging. After much experience of this class, including many visits to common lodging-houses, and some
friendships with the inmates, I am sure that the desire to be untrammelled with social and municipal
obligation leads a great percentage of the occupants to prefer the life to any other. They represent to some
extent in this modern and industrial age the descendants of Jonadab, the son of Rechab, with this exception,
they are by no means averse to the wine-cup. It is to be feared that there is a growth in this portion of our
community, for every scheme for providing decent lodgings for casually homeless men is eagerly taken
advantage of by men who might and who ought to live in homes of their own, and so fulfil the duties of
decent citizenship. In this respect even Lord Rowton's estimable lodging-houses, and those, too, of our
municipal authorities prove no exception, for they attract numbers of men who ought not to be there, but who
might, with just a little more self-reliance and self-respect, live comfortably outside.
But I pass on to the common lodging-houses that accommodate a lower class than is found in municipal or
Rowton houses. Probably none, or at any rate very few, of my readers have had a practical experience of
common lodging-houses. I have, so therefore I ask them to accompany me to one of them.
In a dingy slum stand a number of grimy houses that have been converted into one big house. The various
doorways have been blocked and one enlarged entrance serves.
As we enter, the money-taker in his office demands our business. We tell him that we are anxious to have a
look round, and he tells us that he will send for the deputy. The deputy is the autocrat that governs with
CHAPTER IV 30
undisputable sway in this domain of semi-darkness and dirt. We stand aside in the half-lit passage, taking
good care that we have no contact with the walls; the air we breathe is thick with unpleasant odours, and we
realise at once, and to our complete satisfaction, the smell and flavour of a common lodging-house. We know
instinctively that we have made its acquaintance before, it seems familiar to us, but we are puzzled about it
until we remember we have had a foretaste of it given to us by some lodging-house habitues that we met. The
aroma of a common lodging-house cannot be concealed, it is not to be mistaken. The hour is six o'clock p.m.,
the days are short, for it is November. The lodgers are arriving, so we stand and watch them as they pass the
little office and pay their sixpences. Down goes the money, promptly a numbered ticket takes its place; few
words are exchanged, and away go the ticket- holders to the general kitchen.
Presently the deputy comes to interview us, and he does not put us at our ease; he is a forbidding fellow, one
that evidently will stand no nonsense. Observe, if you please, that he has lost his right hand, and that a
formidable iron hook replaces it. Many a time has that hook been serviceable; if it could speak, many tales
would it tell of victories won, of rows quelled, and of blood spilled.
We have seen the fellow previously, and more than once, at the local police-court. Sometimes he came as
prosecutor, sometimes as prisoner, and at other times as witness. When the police had been required to
supplement the power of his iron hand in quelling the many free fights, he appeared sometimes in the dual
capacity of prisoner and prosecutor.
We know that he retains his position because of his strength and the unscrupulous way in which he uses it. He
knows us too, but he is not well pleased to see us! Nevertheless, he accedes to our request for "just a look
round." So through a large passage we pass, and he ushers us into the lodging-house kitchen. As the door
opens a babel of many voices greets us, a rush of warm air comes at us, and the evidence of our noses
proclaims that bloaters and bacon, liver and onions, sausages and fresh fish are being cooked. We look and
see, we see and taste! Strange eyes are turned upon us just for a moment, but we are not "'tecs," so the eyes are
turned back to the different frying-pans or roasting-forks, as the case may be. See how they crowd round the
huge and open fire, for there is no cooking range. See how they elbow each other as they want space for this
pan or that fork. See how the bloaters curl and twist as if trying to escape from the forks and the fire. See how
the sausages burst and splutter in their different pans. See how stolidly the tough steaks brown, refusing either
to splutter, yield fat, or find gravy to assist in their own undoing.
Listen to the sizzling that pervades the place, acting as an orchestral accompaniment to the chorus of human
voices. Listen to it all, breathe it all, let your noses and your ears take it all in. Then let your eyes and your
imagination have their turn before the pungency of rank tobacco adds to the difficulty of seeing and breathing.
And so we look, and we find there are sixty human beings of both sexes and various ages in that kitchen.
Some of them we know, for have we not seen them in Cheapside, St. Paul's Churchyard, or elsewhere acting
as gutter merchants. Yonder sit an old couple that we have seen selling matches or laces for many years past!
It is not a race day, and there being no "test match" or exciting football match, a youth of sixteen who earns a
precarious living by selling papers in the streets sits beside them. To-day papers are at a discount, so he has
given up business for the day and sought warmth and company in his favourite lodging-house.
Ah! there is our old friend, the street ventriloquist! You see the back of his hand is painted in vivid colours to
resemble the face of an old woman. We know that he has a bundle that contains caps and bonnets, dresses and
skirts that will convert his hand and arm into a quaint human figure. Many a droll story can he tell, for he has
"padded the hoof" from one end of England to the other; he knows every lodging-house from
Newcastle-on-Tyne to Plymouth. He is a graceless dog, fond of a joke, a laugh and a story; he is honest
enough and intelligent enough for anything. But of regular life, discipline and work he will have none. By and
by, after the cooking is all done, he will want to give a performance and take up a collection.
There are a couple, male and female, who tramp the country lanes; the farm haystacks or outbuildings have
been their resting-places during the summer, but approaching winter has sent them back to London.
CHAPTER IV 31
You see that they have got a tattered copy of Moody and Sankey's hymns, which is their stock-in-trade. They
have at different lodging-house "services" picked up some slight knowledge of a limited number of tunes,
now they are trying to commit the words to memory.
To-morrow they will in quiet streets be whining out "Oh, where is my boy to-night?" or "Will you meet me at
the Fountain?"
Look again--here is a shabby-genteel man who lives by his wits. He is fairly educated and can write a
plausible letter. He is dangerous; his stock-in-trade comprises local directories, WHO'S WHO, annual reports
of charitable societies, clergymen's lists, etc. He is a begging-letter writer, and moves from lodging-house to
lodging-house; he writes letters for any of the inmates who have some particular tale of woe to unfold, or
some urgent appeal to make, and he receives the major part of the resultant charity.
He is drunken and bestial, he is a parasite of the worst description, for he preys alike on the benevolent and
upon the poor wretches whose cause he espouses.
He assumes many names, he changes his addresses adroitly, and ticks off very carefully the names and
addresses of people he has defrauded. In fact, he is so clever and slippery that the police and the Charity
Organisation Society cannot locate him. So he thrives, a type of many, for every one of London's common
lodging-houses can provide us with one or more such cunning rogues.
Yonder sits a "wandering boy" about twenty-eight years of age. He is not thriving, and he must needs be
content with simple bread and cheese. A roll of cheap "pirated" music lies on his knee and proclaims his
method of living. His life has its dangers, for he has great difficulty in providing five shillings for his pedlar's
licence, and he runs great risk of having his stock seized by the police, and being committed to prison for a
fine he cannot pay.
He has brought sorrow and disgrace upon his parents, no eye brightens at the mention of his name. Alas! he is
a specimen of the "homeless boy" of whom his neighbours the minstrels will sing to-morrow. He is silent and
moody, for he is not in funds. Are there none among the company whom sheer misfortune has brought down
into this underworld? we ask. Aye, there are, for in this kitchen there are representatives of all sorts and
conditions. See that man in the corner by himself, speaking to no one, cooking nothing, eating nothing; he is
thinking, thinking! This is his first night in a common lodging-house; it is all new to him, he thinks it all so
terrible and disgusting.
He seems inclined to run and spend his night in the streets, and perhaps it will be well for him to do so. He
looks decent, bewildered and sorrowful; we know at a glance that some misfortune has tripped him up, we see
that self-respect is not dead within him. We know that if he stays the night, breathing the foul air, listening to
the horrid talk, seeing much and realising more, feeling himself attacked on every side by the ordinary pests of
common lodging-houses, we know that tomorrow morning his self-respect will be lessened, his moral power
weakened, and his hope of social recovery almost gone. Let him stay a few weeks, then the lodging-house will
become his home and his joy. So we feel inclined to cry out and warn him to escape with his life. This is the
great evil and danger of common lodging-houses; needful as they undoubtedly are for the homeless and the
outcast, they place the unfortunate on an inclined plane down which they slide to complete demoralisation.
I am told that there are four hundred large common lodging-houses in London, many of them capable of
holding several hundred lodgers, and which night after night are filled with a weird collection of humanity.
And they cast a fatal spell upon all who get accustomed to them. Few, very few who have become
acclimatised ever go back to settled home life. For the decencies, amenities and restraints of citizenship
become distasteful. And truly there is much excitement in the life for excitement, at any rate, abounds in
common lodging-houses.
CHAPTER IV 32
Nothing happens in them but the unexpected, and that brings its joys and terrors, its laughter and its tears.
Here a great deal of unrestrained human nature is given free play, and the results are exciting if not edifying.
Let us spend an evening, but not a night--that is too much to ask-with the habitues.
We sit apart and listen to the babel of voices, but we listen in vain for the lodging-house slang of which we are
told so much. They speak very much like other people, and speak on subjects upon which other people speak.
They get as excited as ordinary people, too.
Yonder is a lewd fellow shouting obscenities to a female, who, in an equally loud voice and quite as
unmistakable language, returns him a Roland for every Oliver.
Here are a couple of wordy excitable fellows who are arguing the pros and cons of Free Trade and Tariff
Reform. They will keep at it till the lights are put out, for both are supplied with a plentiful supply of
contradictory literature. Both have fluent tongues, equally bitter, and, having their audience, they, like other
people, must contend for mastery. Not that they care for the rights or wrongs of either question, for both are
prepared, as occasion serves, to take either side. Religion, too, is excitedly discussed, for an animated couple
are discussing Christian Evidences, while the ventriloquist gives parsons generally and bishops in particular a
very warm time; even the Pope and General Booth do not escape his scurrilous but witty indictments.
Meanwhile the street singers are practising songs, sacred and secular, and our friend the street minstrel
produces an old flute and plays an obbligato, whilst the quivering voice of his poor old wife again wants to
know the whereabouts of her wandering boy.
There will be a touching scene when they do meet--may I be there! but I hope they will not meet in a common
lodging-house. Another street minstrel is practising new tunes upon a mouth-organ, wherewith to soften the
hearts of a too obdurate public.
What a babel it all makes; now groups of card-players are getting quarrelsome, for luck has been against
some, or cheating has been discovered; blows are exchanged, and blood flows! As the night advances, men
and women under the influence of drink arrive. Some are merry, others are quarrelsome, some are moody and
lachrymose. The latter become the butt of the former, the noise increases, confusion itself becomes
confounded, and we leave to avoid the general MELEE, and to breathe the night air, which we find grateful
and reviving. Phew! but it was hot and thick, we don't want to breathe it again. It is astonishing that people get
used to it, and like it too! But it leaves its taint upon them, for it permeates their clothing; they carry it about
with them, and any one who gets a whiff of it gets some idea of the breath of a common lodging-house. And
its moral breath has its effect, too! Woe to all that is fresh and fair, young and hopeful, that comes within its
withering influence. Farewell! a long farewell to honour, truth and self-respect, for the hot breath of a
common lodging-house will blast those and every other good quality in young people of either sex that inhale
it. Its breath comes upon them, and lo! they become foul without and vile within, carrying their moral and
physical contagion with them wherever they go.
A moral sepulchre, or rather crematorium, is the common lodging- house, for when its work is done, nothing
is left but ashes. For the old habitues I am not much concerned, and though generally I hold a brief for old
sinners, criminals and convicts, I hold no brief for the old and middle-aged habitues of a common lodginghouse.
Can any one call the dead to life? Can any one convert cold flesh into warm pulsing life? Nay, nay! Talk
about being turned into a pillar of salt! the common lodging-house can do more and worse than that! It can
turn men and women into pillars of moral death, for even the influence of a long term of penal servitude,
withering as it is, cannot for one moment be compared with the corrupting effect of common lodging-house
life.
CHAPTER IV 33
So the old minstrels may go seeking their wandering boy! and the begging-letter writers may go hang!
The human vultures that prey upon the simple and good-natured may, if middle-aged, continue in their evil
ways. But what of the young people of whom there ought to be hope? What of them? how long are these
"lazar houses" to stand with open door waiting to receive, swallow, transform and eject young humanity? But
there is money in them, of course there is; there always is money to be made out of sin and misery if the
community permits.
Human wreckage pays, and furnishes a bigger profit than more humdrum investments. I am told by an old
habitue with whom I have had endless talks and who has taught me much, although he is a graceless rascal,
that one man owns eight of these large establishments, and that he and his family live in respectability and
wealth.
I have no reason to doubt his statement, for these places are mines of wealth, but the owners take precious
good care not to live in them. And infinite care that their families do not inhabit them. Some day when we are
wise--but wisdom comes so slowly--these things will not be left to private enterprise, for municipalities will
provide and own them at no loss to the ratepayers either.
Then decency, though homeless, will have a chance of survival, and moral and physical cleanliness some
chance to live, even in a common lodging-house.
Sadly we need a modern St.George who will face and destroy this monstrous dragon with the fiery breath.
Let it not be said that I am unduly hard upon them who from choice or misfortune inhabit these places. From
my heart I pity them, but one cannot be blind to the general consequences. And these things must be taken
into consideration when efforts are made, as undoubtedly efforts will some day be made, to tackle this
question in a reasonable way.
It is high time, too, that the public understood the difficulties that attend any effort to lift lodging-house
habitues to a higher form of existence.
I am bold enough to hazard the statement that the number of these people increases year by year, and that no
redemptive effort has had the slightest effect in checking the continual increase. As Secretary of the Howard
Association, it is my business year by year to make myself acquainted with the criminal statistics, and all
matters connected with our prisons. These statistics more than confirm my statement, for they tell us that
while drunkenness, brutality, crimes of violence show a steady decrease, vagabondage, sleeping out, begging,
etc., show a continual increase as years roll by.
Of course many of them appear again and again in the prison statistics, nevertheless they form a great and
terrible army, whose increase bodes ill for dear and fair old England.
Like birds they are migratory, but they pour no sweetness on the morning or evening air. Like locusts they
leave a blight behind.
Like famished wolves when winter draws near they seek the habitations of men. Food they must have! There
is corn in Egypt!
When gentle spring returns, then heigho! for the country lanes, villages and provincial towns, and as they
move from place to place they leave their trail behind them.
And what a trail it is! ask the governors of our local prisons, ask the guardians of any country districts, ask the
farmers, aye, and ask the timid women and pretty children, and, my word for it, they will be able to tell you
CHAPTER IV 34
much of these strange beings that returning summer brings unfailingly before them. Their lodging is
sometimes the cold hard ground, or the haystack, or perchance, if in luck, an outbuilding.
The prisons are their sanatoria, the workhouses their homes of rest, and the casual ward their temporary
conveniences. But always before them is one objective, for a common lodging-house is open to them, and its
hypnotism draws them on and on.
So on they go, procreating as they go. Carrying desolation with them, leaving desolation behind them. The
endurance of these people--I suppose they must be called people--is marvellous and their rate of progression is
sometimes astonishing; weary and footsore, maimed, halt or blind they get over the ground at a good uniform
pace.
Look at that strange being that has just passed us as we sat on the bank of a country lane; he goes along with
slouching gait and halting steps; he has no boots worthy of the name, his tattered trousers, much too long, give
us glimpses of his flesh. He wears an old frock-coat that hangs almost to his heels, and a cloth cap, greasy and
worn, upon his head. His beard is wild and abundant, and his hair falls upon his shoulders in a way worthy of
an artist or poet.
Follow him, but not too closely, and you will find it hard to keep up with him, he knows what he is making
for. Neither George Borrow nor Runciman would hold him for a week, for George would want to stop and
talk, but this fellow is silent and grim. A lazar house draws him on, and he needs must reach it, weak and
ill-fed though he is! And he will reach others too, for he is on a circular tour. But next winter will find him in
a Westminster lodging-house if he has luck, on the Embankment if he has not.
He has an easy philosophy: "All the things in the world belong to all the men in the world," is his outspoken
creed, so he steals when he can, and begs when he cannot steal.
But think of this life when women share it, and children are born into it, and lads and lassies are on the tramp.
Dare we think of it? We dare not! If we did, it would not be tolerated for a day. Neither dare I write about it,
for there are many things that cannot be written. So I leave imagination to supply what words must not
convey.
But it is all so pitiful, it is too much for me, for sometimes I feel that I am living with them, tramping with
them, sleeping with them, eating with them; I am become as one of them. I feel the horror, yet I do not realise
the charms.
I am an Englishman! I love liberty! I must be free, or die! I want to order my own life, to control my own
actions, to run on my own lines; I would that all men should have similar rights. But, alas! it cannot
be--civilisation claims and enchains us; we have to submit to its discipline, and it is well that it should be so.
We do not, cannot live to ourselves, and for ourselves. Those days have long passed, and for ever. Orderly life
and regular duties are good for us, and necessary for the well-being of the nation.
A strong robust: nation demands and requires a large amount of freedom, and this it must have, or perish! The
individual man, too, requires a fair amount if he is to be a man. But we may, and we do in some things extend
freedom beyond the legitimate bounds. For in a country of limited area where the bulk of the people live
onerous lives, and manfully perform their duties, we allow a host of parasites to thrive and swarm.
The more this host increases, the weaker the nation becomes, and its existence may ultimately become not a
sign of freedom but a proof of national decay. For parasites thrive on weakly life, be it individual or national.
So while we have a profound pity for the nomads, let us express it with a strong hand. They cannot care for
themselves in any decent way. Let us care for them, and detain them in places that will allow permanent
detention and segregation. And the results will be surprising, for prisons will be less numerous, workhouses,
CHAPTER IV 35
casual wards and asylums less necessary, lazar houses with their pestilential breath will pass away, and
England will be happier, sweeter and more free!
CHAPTER V
FURNISHED APARTMENTS
What fell power decreed that certain streets in London should be devoted to the purpose of providing
"furnished apartments" for the submerged I do not know. But I do know that some streets are entirely devoted
to this purpose, and that a considerable amount of money is made out of such houses.
I ask my readers to accompany me for a visit to one of these streets, and make some acquaintance with the
houses, the furniture and the inhabitants.
The particular streets we select run at a right-angle from a main thoroughfare, a railway divides them from a
beautiful park, and on this railway City merchants pass daily to and from their suburban homes.
I question whether in the whole of London more misery, vice and poverty can be found located in one limited
area than in the streets we are about to visit. I know them, and I have every reason for knowing them. We
make our visit in summer time, when poverty is supposed to be less acute. As we enter the street we notice at
once that a commodious public-house stands and thrives at the entrance. We also notice that there are in the
street several "general" shops, where tea and margarine, firewood, pickles, paraffin oil and cheese, boiled ham
and vinegar, corned beef and Spanish onions, bread and matches are to be obtained.
We stand in the middle of the roadway, in the midst of dirt and refuse, and look up and down the street.
Innumerable children are playing in the gutter or on the pavements, and the whole place teems with life. We
observe that the houses are all alike, the shops excepted. They stand three-storey high; there are nine rooms in
each house. We look in vain for bright windows and for clean and decent curtains.
Every room seems occupied, for there is no card in any window announcing "furnished apartments." The
street is too well known to require advertisement, consequently the "furnished apartments" are seldom without
tenants.
The street is a cave of Adullam to which submerged married couples resort when their own homes, happy or
otherwise, are broken up.
We notice that it is many days since the doors and window-frames of the different houses made acquaintance
with the painter. We notice that all doors stand open, for it is nobody's business to answer a knock, friendly or
otherwise. We look in the various doorways and see in each case the same sort of staircase and the same
unclean desolation.
Who would believe that Adullam Street is a veritable Tom Tiddler's Ground? Would any one believe that a
colony of the submerged could prove a source of wealth?
Let us count the houses on both sides of the street. Forty-five houses! Leave out the two "general" shops, the
greengrocer's and the "off licence"; leave out also the one where the agent and collector lives, that leaves us
forty-one houses of nine rooms let out as furnished apartments.
If let to married couples that means a population of seven hundred and thirty-eight, if all the rooms are
occupied, and supposing that no couple occupies more than one room. As for the children--but we dare not
CHAPTER V 36
think of them--we realise the advantage of the open street of which we freely grant them the freehold. But we
make the acquaintance of a tenant and ask some questions. We find that she has two children, that they have
but one furnished room, for which they pay seven shillings and sixpence weekly in advance! Always in
advance!
She further tells us that their room is one of the best and largest; it faces the street, and is on the first floor. She
says that some rooms are let at six shillings, others at six shillings and sixpence, and some at seven shillings.
We ask her why she lives in Adullam Street, and she tells us that her own furniture was obtained on the "hire
system," and when it was seized they came to Adullam Street, and they do not know how they are to get out
of it.
That sets us thinking and calculating; three hundred and sixty- nine rooms, rent always payable in advance--
from the submerged, too!--average six shillings and sixpence per week per room, why, that is L120 per week,
or L6,240 annually from forty-one houses, if they are regularly occupied. Truly furnished apartments specially
provided for the submerged are extra specially adapted to the purpose of keeping them submerged.
As no deputy disputes our entrance, we enter and proceed to gain some knowledge of the tenants, and take
some stock of their rooms and furniture.
The rooms are simply but by no means sweetly furnished! Here is an inventory and a mental picture of one
room. A commodious bed with dirty appointments that makes us shudder! A dirty table on which are some
odds and ends of unclean crockery, a couple of cheap Windsor chairs, a forbidding-looking chest of drawers, a
rusty frying-pan, a tin kettle, a teapot and a common quart jug. He would be a bold man that bid ten shillings
for the lot, unless he bought them as a going concern. A cheap and nasty paper covers the wall, excepting
where pieces have been torn away, and the broken walls are made of lath and plaster, to provide splendid
cover for innumerable insects which remain in undisputed possession.
One floor much resembles another, but the basement and the top storey rooms are the worst of all. We look
through the window of a second floor back room, and see the out premises, but one look is sufficient.
We want to know something of the tenants, so we enter into conversation with them, and find them by no
means reserved.
Room 1. Husband and wife about thirty-five years of age, no children; husband has been ill for some months,
during which the rent got behind. When he was taken to the infirmary they lost their home altogether; she did
washing and charing for a time, but ultimately got into the "House."
When her husband got better, and was discharged from the infirmary, his old mates collected ten shillings for
him, he took the room in which they now lived, and of course she joined him.
How did they live? Well, it was hardly living; her husband looked round every day and managed to "pick up
something," and she got a day or two days' work every week--their rent was always paid in advance. What
happened when her husband did not "pick up something" she did not say, but semi-starvation seemed the only
alternative.
No. 2. Husband, wife and a girl of seven engaged in making coarse paper flowers of lurid hue. They had been
in that room for six months; they sold the paper flowers in the streets, but being summer time they did not sell
many. At Christmas time people bought them for decorations; sometimes people gave the girl coppers, but did
not take the flowers from her. The police watched them very closely, as they required a licence for selling, and
if they took the girl out in the wet or dark the police charged them.
It was very difficult to live at all, owing to police interference. The girl did not go to school, but they had been
CHAPTER V 37
warned that she must go; they did not know what they should do when she could not help them.
Room 3. A strong man about thirty, his wife and two young children. The remains of a meal upon the table, a
jug of beer and a smell of tobacco. The man looks at us, and a flash of recognition is exchanged. He had been
released from prison at 8.30 that morning after serving a sentence of nine months for shop robbery.
We asked how much gratuity he had earned. Eight shillings, he told us. His wife and children had met him at
the prison gate; they had come straight to that room, for which the wife had previously arranged; they had
paid a week in advance. "What was he going to do?" "He did not know!" He did not appear to care, but he
supposed he "must look round, he would get the rent somehow." We felt that he spoke the truth, and that he
would "get the rent somehow" till the police again prevented him.
We know that prison will again welcome him, and that the workhouse gates will open to receive his wife and
children, the number of which will increase during his next detention in prison.
Room 4. Two females under thirty. No signs of occupation; they are not communicative, neither are they rude,
so we learn nothing from them except that they were not Londoners.
