London Pride
Having thus delivered herself of her disgust, she darted upon her younger sister, laid her hands upon the girl's
shoulders, and contemplated her with mock seriousness.
"What a precocious young saint thou art, with no more interest in the world outside this naked parlour than if
thou wert yonder image of the Holy Mother. Not a question of my husband, or my children, or of the last
fashion in hood and mantle, or of the new laced gloves, or the French King's latest divinity."
"I should dearly like to see your children, Hyacinth," answered her sister.
"Ah! they are the most enchanting creatures, the girl a perpetual sunbeam, ethereal, elfish, a being of life and
movement, and with a loquacity that never tires; the boy a lump of honey, fat, sleek, lazily beautiful. I am
never tired of admiring them, when I have time to see them. Papillon--an old friend of mine has surnamed her
Papillon because she is never still--was five years old on March 19. We were at St. Germain on her birthday.
You should have seen the toys and trinkets and sweetmeats which the Court showered upon her--the King and
Queen, Monsieur, Mademoiselle, the Princess Henrietta, her godmother--everybody had a gift for the
daughter of La folle Baronne Fareham. Yes, they are lovely creatures, Angela; and I am miserable to think
that it may be half a year before I see their sweet faces again."
"Why so long, sister?"
"Because they are at the Château de Montrond, grandmother's place near Dieppe, and because Fareham and I
are going hence to Breda to meet the King, our own King Charles, and help lead him home in triumph. In
London the mob are shouting, roaring, singing, for their King; and Montagu's fleet lies in the Downs, waiting
but the signal from Parliament to cross to Holland. He who left his country in a scurvy fishing-boat will go
back to England in a mighty man-of-war, the _Naseby_--mark you, the _Naseby_--christened by that Usurper,
in insolent remembrance of a rebel victory; but Charles will doubtless change that hated name. He must not be
put in mind of a fight where rebels had the better of loyal gentlemen. He will sail home over those dancing
seas, with a fleet of great white-winged ships circling round him like a flight of silvery doves. Oh, what a turn
of fortune's wheel! I am wild with rapture at the thought of it!"
"You love England better than France, though you must be almost a stranger there," said Angela,
wonderingly, looking at a miniature which her sister wore in a bracelet.
"Nay, love, 'tis in Paris I am an insignificant alien, though they are ever so kind and flattering to me. At St
Germain I was only Madame de Montrond's grand-daughter--the wife of a somewhat morose gentleman who
was cleverer at winning battles than at gaining hearts. At Whitehall I shall be Lady Fareham, and shall enjoy
my full consequence as the wife of an English nobleman of ancient lineage and fine estate, for, I am happy to
tell you, his lordship's property suffered less than most people's in the rebellion, and anything his father lost
when he fought for the good cause will be given back to the son now the good cause is triumphant, with
additions, perhaps--an earl's coronet instead of a baron's beggarly pearls. I should like Papillon to be Lady
Henrietta."
CHAPTER II. 16
"And you will send for your children, doubtless, when you are sure all is safe in England?" said Angela, still
contemplating the portrait in the bracelet, which her sister had unclasped while she talked. "This is Papillon, I
know. What a sweet, kind, mischievous face!"
"Mischievous as a Barbary ape--kind, and sweet as the west wind," said Sir John.
"And your boy?" asked Angela, reclasping the bracelet on the fair, round arm, having looked her fill at the
mutinous eyes, the brown, crisply curling hair, dainty, pointed chin, and dimpled cheeks. "Have you his
picture, too?"
"Not his; but I wear his father's likeness somewhere betwixt buckram and Flanders lace," answered Hyacinth,
gaily, pulling a locket from amidst the splendours of her corsage. "I call it next my heart; but there is a stout
fortification of whalebone between heart and picture. You have gloated enough on the daughter's impertinent
visage. Look now at the father, whom she resembles in little, as a kitten resembles a tiger."
She handed her sister an oval locket, bordered with diamonds, and held by a slender Indian chain; and Angela
saw the face of the brother-in-law whose kindness and hospitality had been so freely promised to her.
She explored the countenance long and earnestly.
"Well, do you think I chose him for his beauty?" asked Hyacinth. "You have devoured every lineament with
that serious gaze of yours, as if you were trying to read the spirit behind that mask of flesh. Do you think him
handsome?"
Angela faltered: but was unskilled in flattery, and could not reply with a compliment.
"No, sister; surely none have ever called this countenance handsome; but it is a face to set one thinking."
"Ay, child, and he who owns the face is a man to set one thinking. He has made me think many a time when I
would have travelled a day's journey to escape the thoughts he forced upon me. He was not made to bask in
the sunshine of life. He is a stormy petrel. It was for his ugliness I chose him. Those dark stern features, that
imperious mouth, and a brow like the Olympian Jove. He scared me into loving him. I sheltered myself upon
his breast from the thunder of his brow, the lightning of his eye."
"He has a look of his cousin Wentworth," said Sir John. "I never see him but I think of that murdered
man--my father's friend and mine--whom I have never ceased to mourn."
"Yet their kin is of the most distant," said Hyacinth. "It is strange that there should be any likeness."
"Faces appear and reappear in families," answered her father. "You may observe that curiously recurring
likeness in any picture-gallery, if the family portraits cover a century or two. Louis has little in common with
his grandfather; but two hundred years hence there may be a prince of the royal house whose every feature
shall recall Henry the Great"
The portrait was returned to its hiding-place, under perfumed lace and cobweb lawn, and the reverend mother
entered the parlour, ready for conversation, and eager to hear the history of the last six weeks, of the collapse
of that military despotism which had convulsed England and dominated Europe, and was now melting into
thin air as ghosts dissolve at cock-crow, of the secret negotiations between Monk and Grenville, now known
to everybody; of the King's gracious amnesty and promise of universal pardon, save for some score or so of
conspicuous villains, whose hands were dyed with the Royal Martyr's blood.
She was full of questioning: and, above all, eager to know whether it was true that King Charles was at heart
CHAPTER II. 17
as staunch a papist as his brother the Duke of York was believed to be, though even the Duke lacked the
courage to bear witness to the true faith.
Two lay-sisters brought in a repast of cakes and syrups and light wines, such delicate and dainty food as the
pious ladies of the convent were especially skilled in preparing, and which they deemed all-sufficient for the
entertainment of company; even when one of their guests was a rugged soldier like Sir John Kirkland. When
the light collation had been tasted and praised, the coach came to the door again, and swallowed up the
beautiful lady and the old cavalier, who vanished from Angela's sight in a cloud of dust, waving hands from
the coach window.
CHAPTER III.
LETTERS FROM HOME.
The quiet days went by, and grew into years, and time was only marked by the gradual failure of the reverend
mother's health; so gradual, so gentle a decay, that it was only when looking back on St. Sylvester's Eve that
her great-niece became aware how much of strength and activity had been lost since the Superior knelt in her
place near the altar, listening to the solemn music of the midnight Mass that sanctified the passing of the year.
This year the reverend mother was led to her seat between two nuns, who sustained her feeble limbs. This
year the meek knees, which had worn the marble floor in long hours of prayer during eighty pious years,
could no longer bend. The meek head was bowed, the bloodless hands were lifted up in supplication, but the
fingers were wasted and stiffened, and there was pain in every movement of the joints.
There was no actual malady, only the slow death in life called old age. All the patient needed was rest and
tender nursing. This last her great-niece supplied, together with the gentlest companionship. No highly trained
nurse, the product of modern science, could have been more efficient than the instinct of affection had made
Angela. And then the patient's temper was so amiable, her mind, undimmed after eighty-three years of life,
was a mirror of God. She thought of her fellow-creatures with a Divine charity; she worshipped her Creator
with an implicit faith. For her in many a waking vision the heavens opened and the spirits of departed saints
descended from their abode in bliss to hold converse with her. Eighty years of her life had been given to
religious exercises and charitable deeds. Motherless before she could speak, she had entered the convent as a
pupil at three years of age, and had taken the veil at seventeen. Her father had married a great heiress, whose
only child, a daughter, was allowed to absorb all the small stock of parental affection; and there was no one to
dispute Anastasia's desire for the cloister. All she knew of the world outside those walls was from hearsay. A
rare visit from her lovely half-sister, the Marquise de Montrond, had astonished her with the sight of a
distinguished Parisienne, and left her wondering. She had never read a secular book. She knew not the
meaning of the word pleasure, save in the mild amusements permitted to the convent children--till they left the
convent as young women--on the evening of a saint's day; a stately dance of curtsyings and waving arms; a
little childish play, dramatising some incident in the lives of the saints. So she lived her eighty years of
obedience and quiet usefulness, learning and teaching, serving and governing. She had lived through the
Thirty Years' War, through the devastations of Wallenstein, the cruelties of Bavarian Tilly, the judicial murder
of Egmont and Horn. She had heard of villages burnt, populations put to the sword, women and children
killed by thousands. She had conversed with those who remembered the League; she had seen the nuns
weeping for Edward Campion's cruel fate; she had heard Masses sung for the soul of murdered Mary Stuart.
She had heard of Raleigh's visions of conquest and of gold, setting his prison-blanched face towards the West,
in the afternoon of life, to encounter bereavement, treachery, sickening failure, and go back to his native
England to expiate the dreams of genius with the blood of a martyr. And through all the changes and chances
of that eventful century she had lived apart, full of pity and wonder, in a charmed circle of piety and love.
Her room, in these peaceful stages of the closing scene, was a haven of rest. Angela loved the seclusion of the
panelled chamber, with its heavily mullioned casement facing the south-west, and the polished oak floor, on
which the red and gold of the sunset were mirrored, as on the dark stillness of a moorland tarn. For her every
CHAPTER III. 18
object in the room had its interest or its charm. The associations of childhood hallowed them all. The large
ivory crucifix, yellow with age, dim with the kisses of adoring lips; the delf statuettes of Mary and Joseph,
flaming with gaudy colour; the figure of the Saviour and St. John the Baptist, delicately carved out of
boxwood, in a group representing the baptism in the river Jordan, the holy dove trembling on a wire over the
Divine head; the books, the pictures, the rosaries: all these she had gazed at reverently when all things were
new, and the convent passages places of shuddering, and the service of the Mass an unintelligible mystery.
She had grown up within those solemn walls; and now, seeing her kinswoman's life gently ebbing away, she
could but wonder what she would have to do in this world when another took the Superior's place, and the tie
that bound her to Louvain would be broken.
The lady who would in all probability succeed Mother Anastasia as Superior was a clever, domineering
woman, whom Angela loved least of all the nuns--a widow of good birth and fortune, and a thorough
Fleming; stolid, bigoted, prejudiced, and taking much credit to herself for the wealth she had brought to the
convent, apt to talk of the class-room and the chapel her money had helped to build and restore as "my
class-room," or "my chapel."
No; Angela had no desire to remain in the convent when her dear kinswoman should have vanished from the
scene her presence sanctified. The house would be haunted with sorrowful memories. It would be time for her
to claim that home which her father had talked of sharing with her in his old age. She could just faintly
remember the house in which she was born--the moat, the fish-pond, the thick walls of yew, the peacocks and
lions cut in box, of which the gardener who clipped them was so proud. Faintly, faintly, the picture of the old
house came back to her; built of grey stone, and stained with moss, grave and substantial, occupying three
sides of a quadrangle, a house of many windows, few of which were intended to open, a house of dark
passages, like these in the convent, and flights of shallow steps, and curious turns and twistings here and there.
There were living birds that sunned their spreading tails and stalked in slow stateliness on the turf terraces, as
well as those peacocks clipped out of yew. The house lay in a Buckinghamshire valley, shut round and
sheltered by hills and coppices, where there was an abundance of game. Angela had seen the low, cavern-like
larder hung with pheasants and hares.
Her heart yearned towards the old house, so distinctly pictured by memory, though perchance with some
differences from the actual scene. The mansion would seem smaller to her, doubtless, beholding it with the
eyes of womanhood, than childish memory made it. But to live there with her father, to wait upon him and
tend him, to have Hyacinth's children there, playing in the gardens as she had played, would be as happy a life
as her fancy could compass.
All that she knew of the march of events during those tranquil years in the convent came to her in letters from
her sister, who was a vivacious letter-writer, and prided herself upon her epistolary talent--as indeed upon her
general superiority, from a literary standpoint, to the women of her day.
It was a pleasure to Lady Fareham in some rare interval of solitude--when the weather was too severe for her
to venture outside the hall door, even in her comfortable coach, and when by some curious concatenation she
happened to be without visitors--to open her portfolio and prattle with her pen to her sister, as she would have
prattled with her tongue to the visitors whom snow or tempest kept away. Her letters written from London
were apt to be rare and brief, Angela noted; but from his lordship's mansion near Oxford, or at the Grange
between Fareham and Winchester--once the property of the brothers of St. Cross--she always sent a budget.
Few of these lengthy epistles contained anything bearing upon Angela's own existence--except the
oft-repeated entreaty that she would make haste and join them--or even the flippant suggestion that Mother
Anastasia should make haste and die. They were of the nature of news-letters; but the news was tinctured by
the feminine medium through which it came, and there was a flavour of egotism in almost every page. Lady
Fareham wrote as only a pretty woman, courted, flattered, and indulged by everybody about her, ever since
she could remember, could be forgiven for writing. People had petted her and worshipped her with such
uniform subservience that she had grown to thirty years of age without knowing that she was selfish,
CHAPTER III. 19
accepting homage and submission as a law of the universe, as kings and princes do.
Only in one of those letters was there that which might be called a momentous fact, but which Angela took as
easily as if it had been a mere detail, to be dismissed from her thoughts when the letter had been laid aside.
It was a letter with a black seal, announcing the death of the Marquise de Montrond, who had expired of an
apoplexy at her house in the Marais, after a supper party at which Mademoiselle, Madame de Longueville,
Madame de Montausier, the Duchesse de Bouillon, Lauzun, St. Evremond, cheery little Godeau, Bishop of
Vence, and half a dozen other famous wits had been present, a supper bristling with royal personages. Death
had come with appalling suddenness while the lamps of the festival were burning, and the cards were still
upon the tables, and the last carriage had but just rolled under the _porte cochère_.
"It is the manner of death she would have chosen," wrote Hyacinth. "She never missed confession on the first
Sunday of the month; and she was so generous to the Church and to the poor that her director declared she
would have been too saintly for earth, but for the human weakness of liking fine company. And now, dearest,
I have to tell you how she has disposed of her fortune; and I hope, if you should think she has not used you
generously, you will do me the justice to believe that I have neither courted her for her wealth nor influenced
her to my dear sister's disadvantage. You will consider, _très chère_, that I was with her from my eighth year
until the other day when Fareham brought me to England. She loved me passionately in my childhood, and
has often told me since that she never felt towards me as a grandmother, but as if she had been actually my
mother, being indeed still a young woman when she adopted me, and by strangers always mistaken for my
mother. She was handsome to the last, and young in mind and in habits long after youth had left her. I was
said to be the image of what she was when she rivalled Madame de Hautefort in the affections of the late
King. You must consider, sweetheart, that he was the most moral of men, and that with him love meant a
passion as free from sensual taint as the preferences of a sylph. I think my good grandmother loved me all the
better for this fancied resemblance. She would arrange her jewels about my hair and bosom, as she had worn
them when Buckingham came wooing for his master; and then she would bid her page hold a mirror before
me and tell me to look at the face of which Queen Anne had been jealous, and for which Cinq Mars had run
mad. And then she would shed a tear or two over the years and the charms that were gone, till I brought the
cards and cheered her spirits with her favourite game of primero.
"She had her fits of temper and little tantrums sometimes, Ange, and it needed some patience to restrain one's
tongue from insolence; but I am happy to remember that I ever bore her in profound respect, and that I never
made her seriously angry but once--which was when I, being then almost a child, went out into the streets of
Paris with Henri de Malfort and a wild party, masked, to hear Beaufort address the populace in the
market-place, and when I was so unlucky as to lose the emerald cross given her by the great Cardinal, for
whom, I believe, she had a sneaking kindness. Why else should she have so hated his Eminence's very much
favoured niece, Madame de Combalet?
"But to return to that which concerns my dear sister. Regarding me as her own daughter, the Marquise has
lavished her bounties upon me almost to the exclusion of my own sweet Angela. In a word, dearest, she leaves
you a modest income of four hundred louis--or about three hundred pounds sterling--the rental of two farms in
Normandy; and all the rest of her fortune she bequeaths to me, and Papillon after me, including her house in
the Marais--sadly out of fashion now that everybody of consequence is moving to the Place Royale--and her
château near Dieppe; besides all her jewels, many of which I have had in my possession ever since my
marriage. My sweet sister shall take her choice of a carcanet among those old-fashioned trinkets. And now,
dearest, if you are left with a pittance that will but serve to pay for your gloves and fans at the Middle
Exchange, and perhaps to buy you an Indian night-gown in the course of the year--for your Court petticoats
and mantuas will cost three times as much--you have but to remember that my purse is to be yours, and my
home yours, and that Fareham and I do but wait to welcome you either to Fareham House, in the Strand, or to
Chiltern Abbey, near Oxford. The Grange near Fareham I never intend to re-enter if I can help it. The place is
a warren of rats, which the servants take for ghosts. If you love water you will love our houses, for the river
CHAPTER III. 20
runs near them both; indeed, when in London, we almost think ourselves in Venice, save that we have a
spacious garden, which I am told few of the Venetians can command, their city being built upon an
assemblage of minuscule islets, linked together by innumerable bridges."
Angela smiled as she looked down at her black gown--the week-day uniform of the convent school,
exchanged for a somewhat superior grey stuff on Sundays and holidays--smiled at the notion of spending the
rent of two farms upon her toilet. And how much more ridiculous seemed the assertion that to appear at King
Charles's Court she must spend thrice as much! Yet she could but remember that Hyacinth had described
trains and petticoats so loaded with jewelled embroidery that it was a penance to wear them--lace worth
hundreds of pounds--plumed hats that cost as much as a year's maintenance in the convent.
Mother Anastasia expressed considerable displeasure at Madame de Montrond's disposal of her wealth.
"This is what it is to live in a Court, and to care only for earthly things!" she said. "All sense of justice is lost
in that world of vanity and self-love. You are as near akin to the Marquise as your sister; and yet, because she
was familiar with the one and not with the other--and because her vain, foolish soul took pleasure in a beauty
that recalled her own perishable charms, she leaves one sister a great fortune and the other a pittance!"
"Dear aunt, I am more than content----"
"But I am not content for you, Angela. Had the estate been divided equally you might have taken the veil, and
succeeded to my place in this beloved house, which needs the accession of wealth to maintain it in usefulness
and dignity."
Angela would not wound her aunt's feelings by one word of disparagement of the house in which she had
been reared; but, looking along the dim avenue of the future, she yearned for some wider horizon than the sky,
barred with tall poplars which rose high above the garden wall that formed the limit of her daily walks. Her
rambles, her recreations, had all been confined within that space of seven or eight acres, and she thought
sometimes with a sudden longing of those hills and valleys of fertile Buckinghamshire, which lay so far back
in the dawn of her mind, and were yet so distinctly pictured in her memory.
And London--that wonderful city of which her sister wrote in such glowing words! the long range of palaces
beside the swift-flowing river, wider than the Seine where it reflects the gloomy bulk of the Louvre and the
Temple! Were it only once in her life, she would like to see London--the King, the two Queens, Whitehall,
and Somerset House. She would like to see all the splendour of Court and city; and then to taste the placid
retirement of the house in the valley, and to be her father's housekeeper and companion.
Another letter from Hyacinth announced the death of Mazarin.
"The Cardinal is no more. He died in the day of success, having got the better of all his enemies. A violent
access of gout was followed by an affection of the chest which proved fatal. His sick-room was crowded with
courtiers and sycophants, and he was selling sinecures up to the day of his death. Fareham says his death-bed
was like a money-changer's counter. He was passionately fond of hocca, the Italian game which he brought
into fashion, and which ruined half the young men about the Court. The counterpane was scattered with
money and playing cards, which were only brushed aside to make room for the last Sacraments. My Lord
Clarendon declares that his spirits never recovered from the shock of his Majesty's restoration, which falsified
all his calculations. He might have made his favourite niece Queen of England; but his Italian caution
restrained him, and the beautiful Hortense has to put up with a new-made duke--a title bought with her uncle's
money--to whom the Cardinal affianced her on his death-bed. He was a remarkable man, and so profound a
dissembler that his pretended opposition to King Louis' marriage with his niece Olympe Mancini would have
deceived the shrewdest observer, had we not all known that he ardently desired the union, and that it was only
his fear of Queen Anne's anger which prevented it. Her Spanish pride was in arms at the notion, and she
CHAPTER III. 21
would not have stopped short at revolution to prevent or to revenge such an alliance.
"This was perhaps the only occasion upon which she ever seriously opposed Mazarin. With him expires all
her political power. She is now as much a cypher as in the time of the late King, when France had only one
master, the great Cardinal. He who is just dead, Fareham says, was but a little Richelieu; and he recalls how
when the great Cardinal died people scarce dared tell one another of his death, so profound was the awe in
which he was held. He left the King a nullity, and the Queen all powerful. She was young and beautiful then,
you see; her husband was marked for death, her son was an infant. All France was hers--a kingdom of
courtiers and flatterers. And now she is old and ailing; and Mazarin being gone, the young King will submit to
no minister who claims to be anything better than a clerk or a secretary. Colbert he must tolerate--for Colbert
means prosperity--but Colbert will have to obey. My friend, the Duchesse de Longueville, who is now living
in strict retirement, writes me the most exquisite letters; and from her I hear all that happens in that country
which I sometimes fancy is more my own than the duller climate where my lot is now cast. Fifteen years at
the French Court have made me in heart and mind almost a Frenchwoman; nor can I fail to be influenced by
my maternal ancestry. I find it difficult sometimes to remember my English, when conversing with the
clod-hoppers of Oxfordshire, who have no French, yet insist, for finery's sake, upon larding their rustic
English with French words.
"All that is most agreeable in our court is imitated from the Palais Royal and the Louvre.
"'Whitehall is but the shadow of a shadow,' says Fareham, in one of his philosophy fits, preaching upon the
changes he has seen in Paris and London. And, indeed, it is strange to have lived through two revolutions, one
so awful in its final catastrophe that it dwarfs the other, yet both terrible; for I, who was a witness of the
sufferings of Princes and Princesses during the two wars of the Fronde, am not inclined to think lightly of a
civil war which cost France some of the flower of her nobility, and made her greatest hero a prisoner and an
exile for seven years of his life.
"But oh, my dear, it was a romantic time! and I look back and am proud to have lived in it. I was but twelve
years old at the siege of Paris; but I was in Madame de Longueville's room, at the Hôtel de Ville, while the
fighting was going on, and the officers, in their steel cuirasses, coming in from the thick of the strife. Such a
confusion of fine ladies and armed men--breast-plates and blue scarves--fiddles squeaking in the salon,
trumpets sounding in the square below!"
* * * * *
In a letter of later date Lady Fareham expatiated upon the folly of her sister's spiritual guides.
"I am desolated, ma mie, by the absurd restriction which forbids you to profit by my New Year's gift. I
thought, when I sent you all the volumes of la Scudèry's enchanting romance, I had laid up for you a year of
enjoyment, and that, touched by the baguette of that exquisite fancy, your convent walls would fall, like those
of Jericho at the sound of Jewish trumpets, and you would be transported in imagination to the finest society
in the world--the company of Cyrus and Mandane--under which Oriental disguise you are shown every
feature of mind and person in Condé and his heroic sister, my esteemed friend, the Duchesse de Longueville.
As I was one of the first to appreciate Mademoiselle Scudèry's genius, and to detect behind the name of the
brother the tender sentiments and delicate refinement of the sister's chaster pen, so I believe I was the first to
call the Duchesse 'Mandane,' a sobriquet which soon became general among her intimates.
"You are not to read 'Le Grand Cyrus," your aunt tells you, because it is a romance! That is to say, you are
forbidden to peruse the most faithful history of your own time, and to familiarise yourself with the persons
and minds of great people whom you may never be so fortunate as to meet in the flesh. I myself, dearest
Ange, have had the felicity to live among these princely persons, to revel in the conversations of the Hôtel de
Rambouillet--not, perhaps, as our grandmother would have told you, in its most glorious period--but at least
CHAPTER III. 22
while it was still the focus of all that is choicest in letters and in art. Did we not hear M. Poquelin read his first
comedy before it was represented by Monsieur's company in the beautiful theatre at the Palais Royal, built by
Richelieu, when it was the Palais Cardinal? Not read 'Le Grand Cyrus,' and on the score of morality! Why,
this most delightful book was written by one of the most moral women in Paris--one of the chastest--against
whose reputation no word of slander has ever been breathed! It must, indeed, be confessed that Sapho is of an
ugliness which would protect her even were she not guarded by the aegis of genius. She is one of those
fortunate unfortunates who can walk through the furnace of a Court unscathed, and leave a reputation for
modesty in an age that scarce credits virtue in woman.
"I fear, dear child, that these narrow-minded restrictions of your convent will leave you of a surpassing
ignorance, which may cover you with confusion when you find yourself in fine company. There are
accomplishments without which youth is no more admired than age and grey hairs; and to sparkle with wit or
astonish with learning is a necessity for a woman of quality. It is only by the advantages of education that we
can show ourselves superior to such a hussy as Albemarle's gutter-bred duchess, who was the faithless wife of
a sailor or barber--I forget which--and who hangs like a millstone upon the General's neck now that he has
climbed to the zenith. To have perfect Italian and some Spanish is as needful as to have fine eyes and
complexion nowadays. And to dance admirably is a gift indispensable to a lady. Alas! I fear that those little
feet of yours--I hope they are small--have never been taught to move in a coranto or a contre-danse, and that
you will have to learn the alphabet of dancing at an age when most women are finished performers. The great
Condé, while winning sieges and battles that surpassed the feats of Greeks and Romans, contrived to make
himself the finest dancer of his day, and won more admiration in high-bred circles by his graceful movements,
which every one could understand and admire, than by prodigies of valour at Dunkirk or Nordlingen."
The above was one of Lady Fareham's most serious letters. Her pen was exercised, for the most part, in a
lighter vein. She wrote of the Court beauties, the Court jests--practical jokes some of them, which our finer
minds of to-day would consider in execrable taste--such jests as we read of in Grammont's memoirs, which
generally aimed at making an ugly woman ridiculous, or an injured husband the sport and victim of wicked
lover and heartless wife. No sense of the fitness of things constrained her ladyship from communicating these
Court scandals to her guileless sister. Did they not comprise the only news worth anybody's attention, and
relate to the only class of people who had any tangible existence for Lady Fareham? There were millions of
human beings, no doubt, living and acting and suffering on the surface of the earth, outside the stellary circles
of which Louis and Charles were the suns; but there was no interstellar medium of sympathy to convey the
idea of those exterior populations to Hyacinth's mind. She knew of the populace, French or English, as of
something which was occasionally given to become dangerous and revolutionary, which sometimes starved
and sometimes died of the plague, and was always unpleasing to the educated eye.
Masquerades, plays, races at Newmarket, dances, duels, losses at cards--Lady Fareham touched every subject,
and expatiated on all; but she had usually more to tell of the country she had left than of that in which she was
living.
"Here everything is on such a small scale, _si mesquin!_" she wrote. "Whitehall covers a large area, but it is
only a fine banqueting hall and a labyrinth of lodgings, without suite or stateliness. The pictures in the late
King's cabinet are said to be the finest in the world, but they are a kind of pieces for which I care very
little--Flemish and Dutch chiefly--with a series of cartoons by Raphael, which connoisseurs affect to admire,
but which, did they belong to me, I would gladly exchange for a set of Mortlake tapestries.
"His Majesty here builds ships, while the King of France builds palaces. I am told Louis is spending millions
on the new palace at Versailles, an ungrateful site--no water, no noble prospect as at St. Germain, no
population. The King likes the spot all the better, Madame tells me, because he has to create his own
landscape, to conjure lakes and cataracts out of dry ground. The buildings have been but two years in
progress, and it must be long before these colossal foundations are crowned with the edifice which Louis and
his architect, Mansart, have planned. Colbert is furious at this squandering of vast sums on a provincial
CHAPTER III. 23
palace, while the Louvre, the birthplace and home of dynasties, remains unfinished.
"The King's reason for disliking St. Germain--a château his mother has always loved--has in it something
childish and fantastic, if, as my dear duchess declares, he hates the place only because he can see the towers of
St. Denis from the terrace, and is thus hourly reminded of death and the grave. I can hardly believe that a
being of such superior intelligence could be governed by any such horror of man's inevitable end. I would far
sooner attribute the vast expenditure of Versailles to the common love of monarchs and great men for building
houses too large for their necessities. Indeed, it was but yesterday that Fareham took me to see the palace--for
I can call it by no meaner name--that Lord Clarendon is building for himself in the open country at the top of
St. James's Street. It promises to be the finest house in town, and, although not covering so much ground as
Whitehall, is judged far superior to that inchoate mass in its fine proportions and the perfect symmetry of its
saloons and galleries. There is a garden a-making, projected by Mr. Evelyn, a great authority on trees and
gardens. A crowd of fine company had assembled to see the newly finished hall and dining parlour, among
them a fussy person, who came in attendance upon my Lord Sandwich, and who was more voluble than
became his quality as a clerk in the Navy Office. He was periwigged and dressed as fine as his master, and, on
my being civil to him, talked much of himself and of divers taverns in the city where the dinners were either
vastly good or vastly ill. I told him that as I never dined at a tavern the subject was altogether beyond the
scope of my intelligence, at which Sandwich and Fareham laughed, and my pertinacious gentleman blushed as
red as the heels of his shoes. I am told the creature has a pretty taste in music, and is the son of a tailor, but
professes a genteel ancestry, and occasionally pushes into the best company.
"Shall I describe to you one of my latest conquests, sweetheart? 'Tis a boy--an actual beardless boy of
eighteen summers; but such a boy! So beautiful, so insolent, with an impudence that can confront Lord
Clarendon himself, the gravest of noblemen, who, with the sole exception of my Lord Southampton, is the one
man who has never crossed Mrs. Palmer's threshold, or bowed his neck under that splendid fury's yoke. My
admirer thinks no more of smoking these grave nobles, men of a former generation, who learnt their manners
at the court of a serious and august King, than I do of teasing my falcon. He laughs at them, jokes with them
in Greek or in Latin, has a ready answer and a witty quip for every turn of the discourse; will even interrupt
his Majesty in one of those anecdotes of his Scottish martyrdom which he tells so well and tells so often.
Lucifer himself could not be more arrogant or more audacious than this bewitching boy-lover of mine, who
writes verses in English or Latin as easy as I can toss a shuttlecock. I doubt the greater number of his verses
are scarce proper reading for you or me, Angela; for I see the men gather round him in corners as he murmurs
his latest madrigal to a chosen half-dozen or so; and I guess by their subdued tittering that the lines are not
over modest; while by the sidelong glances the listeners cast round, now at my Lady Castlemaine, and anon at
some other goddess in the royal pantheon, I have a shrewd notion as to what alabaster breast my witty lover's
shafts are aimed at.
"This youthful devotee of mine is the son of a certain Lord Wilmot, who fought on the late King's side in the
troubles. This creature went to the university of Oxford at twelve years old--as it were, straight from his
go-cart to college, and was master of arts at fourteen. He has made the grand tour, and pretends to have seen
so much of this life that he has found out the worthlessness of it. Even while he woes me with a most romantic
ardour, he affects to have outgrown the capacity to love.
"Think not, dearest, that I outstep the bounds of matronly modesty by this airy philandering with my young
Lord Rochester, or that my serious Fareham is ever offended at our pretty trifling. He laughs at the lad as
heartily as I do, invites him to our table, and is amused by his monkeyish tricks. A woman of quality must
have followers; and a pert, fantastical boy is the safest of lovers. Slander itself could scarce accuse Lady
Fareham, who has had soldier-princes and statesmen at her feet, of an unworthy tenderness for a jackanapes of
seventeen; for, indeed, I believe his eighteenth birthday is still in the womb of time. I would with all my heart
thou wert here to share our innocent diversions; and I know not which of all my playthings thou wouldst
esteem highest, the falcon, my darling spaniels, made up of soft silken curls and intelligent brown eyes, or
Rochester. Nay, let me not forget the children, Papillon and Cupid, who are truly very pretty creatures, though
CHAPTER III. 24
consummate plagues. The girl, Papillon, has a tongue which Wilmot says is the nearest approach to perpetual
motion that he has yet discovered; and the boy, who was but seven last birthday, is full of mischief, in which
my admirer counsels and abets him.
"Oh, this London, sweetheart, and this Court! How wide those violet eyes would open couldst thou but look
suddenly in upon us after supper at Basset, or in the park, or at the play-house, when the orange girls are
smoking the pretty fellows in the pit, and my Lady Castlemaine is leaning half out of her box to talk to the
King in his! I thought I had seen enough of festivals and dances, stage-plays and courtly diversions beyond
sea; but the Court entertainments at Paris or St. Germain differed as much from the festivities of Whitehall as
a cathedral service from a dance in a booth at Bartholomew Fair. His Majesty of France never forgets that he
is a king. His Majesty of England only remembers his kingship when he wants a new subsidy, or to get a Bill
hurried through the Houses. Louis at four-and-twenty was serious enough for fifty. Charles at thirty-four has
the careless humour of a schoolboy. He is royal in nothing except his extravagance, which has squandered
more millions than I dare mention since he landed at Dover.
"I am growing almost as sober as my solemn spouse, who will ever be railing at the King and the Duke, and
even more bitterly at the favourite, his Grace of Buckingham, who is assuredly one of the most agreeable men
in London. I asked Fareham only yesterday why he went to Court, if his Majesty's company is thus distasteful
to him. 'It is not to his company I object, but to his principles,' he answered, in that earnest fashion of his
which takes the lightest questions au grand serieux. 'I see in him a man who, with natural parts far above the
average, makes himself the jest of meaner intellects, and the dupe of greedy courtesans; a man who, trained in
the stern school of adversity, overshadowed by the great horror of his father's tragical doom, accepts life as
one long jest, and being, by a concatenation of circumstances bordering on the miraculous, restored to the
privileges of hereditary monarchy, takes all possible pains to prove the uselessness of kings. I see a man who,
borne back to power by the irresistible current of the people's affections, has broken every pledge he gave that
people in the flush and triumph of his return. I see one who, in his own person, cares neither for Paul nor
Peter, and yet can tamely witness the persecution of his people because they do not conform to a State
religion--can allow good and pious men to be driven out of the pulpits where they have preached the Gospel
of Christ, and suffer wives and children to starve because the head of the household has a conscience. I see a
king careless of the welfare of his people, and the honour and glory of his reign; affecting to be a patriot, and a
man of business, on the strength of an extravagant fancy for shipbuilding; careless of everything save the
empty pleasure of an idle hour. A king who lavishes thousands upon wantons and profligates, and who ever
gives not to the most worthy, but to the most importunate.'
"I laughed at this tirade, and told him, what indeed I believe, that he is at heart a Puritan, and would better
consort with Baxter and Bunyan, and that frousy crew, than with Buckhurst and Sedley, or his brilliant
kinsman, Roscommon."
From her father directly, Angela heard nothing, and her sister's allusions to him were of the briefest, anxiously
as she had questioned that lively letter-writer. Yes, her father was well, Hyacinth told her; but he stayed
mostly at the Manor Moat. He did not care for the Court gaieties.
"I believe he thinks we have all parted company with our wits," she wrote. "He seldom sees me but to lecture
me, in a sidelong way, upon my folly; for his railing at the company I keep hits me by implication. I believe
these old courtiers of the late King are Puritans at heart; and that if Archbishop Laud were alive he would be
as bitter against the sins of the town as any of the cushion-thumping Anabaptists that preach to the elect in
back rooms and blind alleys. My father talks and thinks as if he had spent all his years of exile in the cave of
the Seven Sleepers. And yet he fought shoulder to shoulder with some of the finest gentlemen in
France--Condé, Turenne, Gramont, St. Evremond, Bussy, and the rest of them. But all the world is young, and
full of wit and mirth, since his Majesty came to his own; and elderly limbs are too stiff to trip in our new
dances. I doubt my father's mind is as old-fashioned, and of as rigid a shape as his Court suit, at sight of which
my best friends can scarce refrain from laughing."
CHAPTER III. 25
This light mention of a parent whom she reverenced wounded Angela to the quick; and that wound was
deepened a year later, when she was surprised by a visit from her father, of which no letter had forewarned
her. She was walking in the convent garden, in her hour of recreation, tasting the sunny air, and the beauty of
the many-coloured tulips in the long narrow borders, between two espalier rows trained with an exquisite
neatness, and reputed to bear the finest golden pippins and Bergamot pears within fifty miles of the city. The
trees were in blossom, and a wall of pink and white bloom rose up on either hand above the scarlet and amber
tulips.
Turning at the end of the long alley, where it met a wall that in August was flushed with the crimson velvet of
peaches and nectarines, Angela saw a man advancing from the further end of the walk, attended by a lay
sister. The high-crowned hat and pointed beard, the tall figure in a grey doublet crossed with a black
sword-belt, the walk, the bearing, were unmistakable. It might have been a figure that had stepped out of
Vandyke's canvas. It had nothing of the fuss and flutter, the feathers and ruffles, the loose flow of brocade and
velvet, that marked the costume of the young French Court.
Angela ran to receive her father, and could scarce speak to him, she was so startled, and yet so glad.
"Oh, sir, when I prayed for you at Mass this morning, how little I hoped for so much happiness! I had a letter
from Hyacinth only a week ago, and she wrote nothing of your intentions. I knew not that you had crossed the
sea."
"Why, sweetheart, Hyacinth sees me too rarely, and is too full of her own affairs, ever to be beforehand with
my intentions; and, although I have been long heartily sick of England, I only made up my mind to come to
Flanders less than a week ago. No sooner thought of than done. I came by our old road, in a merchant craft
from Harwich to Ostend, and the rest of the way in the saddle. Not quite so fast as they used to ride that
carried his Majesty's post from London to York, in the beginning of the troubles, when the loyal gentlemen
along the north road would galop faster with despatches and treaties than ever they rode after a stag. Ah, child,
how hopeful we were in those days; and how we all told each other it was but a passing storm at Westminster,
which could all be lulled by a little civil concession here and there on the King's part! And so it might,
perhaps, if he would but have conceded the right thing at the right time--yielded but just the inch they asked
for when they first asked--instead of shilly-shallying till they got angry, and wanted ells instead of inches. 'Tis
the stitch in time, Angela, that saves trouble, in politics as well as in thy petticoat."
He had flung his arm round his daughter's neck as they paced slowly side by side.
"Have you come to stay at Louvain, sir?" she asked, timidly.
"Nay, love, the place is too quiet for me. I could not stay in a town that is given over to learning and piety.
The sound of their everlasting carillon would tease my ear with the thought, 'Lo, another quarter of an hour
gone of my poor remnant of days, and nothing to do but to doze in the sunshine or fondle my spaniel, fill my
pipe, or ride a lazy horse on a level road, such as I have ever hated.'"
"But why did you tire of England, sir? I thought the King would have wanted you always near him. You, his
father's close friend, who suffered so much for Royal friendship. Surely he loves and cherishes you! He must
be a base, ungrateful man if he do not."
"Oh, the King is grateful, Angela, grateful enough and to spare. He never sees me at Court but he has some
gracious speech about his father's regard for me. It grows irksome at last, by sheer repetition. The turn of the
sentence varies, for his Majesty has a fine standing army of words, but the gist of the phrase is always the
same, and it means, 'Here is a tiresome old Put to whom I must say something civil for the sake of his ancient
vicissitudes.' And then his phalanx of foppery stares at me as if I were a Topinambou; and since I have seen
them mimic Ned Hyde's stately speech and manners, I doubt not before I have crossed the ante-room I have
CHAPTER III. 26
served to make sport for the crew, since their wit has but two phases--ordure and mimickry. Look not so glum,
daughter. I am glad to be out of a Court which is most like--such places as I dare not name to thee."
"But to have you disrespected, sir; you, so brave, so noble! You who gave the best years of your life to your
royal master!"
"What I gave I gave, child. I gave him youth--that never comes back--and fortune, that is not worth grieving
for. And now that I have begun to lose the reckoning of my years since fifty, I feel I had best take myself back
to that roving life in which I have no time to brood upon losses and sorrows."
"Dear father, I am sure you must mistake the King's feelings towards you. It is not possible that he can think
lightly of such devotion as yours."
"Nay, sweetheart, who said he thinks lightly? He never thinks of me at all, or of anything serious under God's
sky. So long as he has spending money, and can live in a circle of bright eyes, and hear only flippant tongues
that offer him a curious incense of flattery spiced with impertinence, Charles Stuart has all of this life that he
values. And for the next--a man who is shrewdly suspected of being a papist, while he is attached by gravest
vows to the Church of England, must needs hold heaven's rewards and hell's torments lightly."
"But Queen Catherine, sir--does not she favour you? My aunt says she is a good woman."
"Yes, a good woman, and the nearest approach to a cypher to be found at Hampton Court or Whitehall. Young
Lord Rochester has written a poem upon 'Nothing.' He might have taken Queen Catherine's name as a
synonym. She is nothing; she counts for nothing. Her love can benefit nobody; her hatred, were the poor soul
capable of hating persistently, can do no one harm."
"And the King--is he so unkind to her?"
"Unkind! No. He allows her to live. Nay, when for a few days--the brief felicity of her poor life--she seemed
on the point of dying, he was stricken with remorse for all that he had not been to her, and was kind, and
begged her to live for his sake. The polite gentleman meant it for a compliment--one of those pious falsehoods
that men murmur in dying ears--but she took him at his word and recovered; and she is there still, a little dark
lady in a fine gown, of whom nobody takes any notice, beyond the emptiest formality of bent knees and
backward steps. There are long evenings at Hampton Court in which she is scarce spoken to, save when she
fawns upon the fortunate lady whom she began by hating. Oh, child, I should not talk to you of these things;
but some of the disgust that has made my life bitter bubbles over in spite of me. I am a wanderer and an exile
again, dear heart. I would sooner trail a pike abroad than suffer neglect at home. I will fight under any flag so
long as it flies not for my country's foe. I am going back to my old friends at the Louvre, to those few who are
old enough to care for me; and if there come a war with Spain, why my sword may be of some small use to
young Louis, whose mother was always gracious to me in the old days at St. Germain, when she knew not in
the morning whether she would go safe to bed at night. A golden age of peace has followed that wild time; but
the Spanish king's death is like to light the torch and set the war-dogs barking. Louis will thrust his sword
through the treaty of the Pyrenees if he see the way to a throne t'other side of the mountains."
"But could a good man violate a treaty?"
"Ambition knows no laws, sweet, nor ever has since Hannibal."
"Then King Louis is no better a man than King Charles?"
"I cannot answer for that, Angela; but I'll warrant him a better king from the kingly point of view. Scarce had
death freed him from the Cardinal's leading-strings than he snatched the reins of power, showed his ministers
CHAPTER III. 27
that he meant to drive the coach. He has a head as fit for business as if he had been the son of a
woollen-draper. Mazarin took pains to keep him ignorant of everything that a king ought to know; but that
shrewd judgment of his taught him that he must know as much as his servants, unless he wanted them to be
his masters. He has the pride of Lucifer, with a strength of will and power of application as great as
Richelieu's. You will live to see that no second Richelieu, no new Mazarin, will arise in his reign. His
ministers will serve him, and go down before him, like Nicolas Fouquet, to whom he has been implacable."
"Poor gentleman! My aunt told me that when his judges sentenced him to banishment from France, the King
changed the sentence to imprisonment for life."
"I doubt if the King ever forgave those fêtes at Vaux, which were designed to dazzle Mademoiselle la
Vallière, whom this man had the presumption to love. One may pity so terrible a fall, yet it is but the ruin of a
bold sensualist, who played with millions as other men play with tennis balls, and who would have drained
the exchequer by his briberies and extravagances if he had not been brought to a dead stop. The world has
been growing wickeder, dearest, while this fair head has risen from my knee to my shoulder; but what have
you to do with its wickedness? Here you are happy and at peace----"
"Not happy, father, if you are to hazard your life in battles and sieges. Oh, sir, that life is too dear to us, your
children, to be risked so lightly. You have done your share of soldiering. Everybody that ever heard your
name in England or in France knows it is the name of a brave captain--a leader of men. For our sakes, take
your rest now, dear sir. I should not sleep in peace if I knew you were with Condé's army. I should dream of
you wounded and dying. I cannot bear to think of leaving my aunt now that she is old and feeble; but my first
duty is to you, and if you want me I will go with you wherever you may please to make your home. I am not
afraid of strange countries."
"Spoken like my sweet daughter, whose baby arms clasped my neck in the day of despair. But you must stay
with the reverend mother, sweetheart. These bones of mine must be something stiffer before they will consent
to rest in the chimney corner, or sit in the shade of a yew hedge while other men throw the bowls. When I
have knocked about the world a few years longer, and when Mother Anastasia is at rest, thou shalt come to me
at the Manor, and I will find thee a noble husband, and will end my days with my children and grandchildren.
The world has so changed since the forties, that I shall think I have lived centuries instead of decades, when
the farewell hour strikes. In the mean time I am pleased that you should be here. The Court is no place for a
pure maiden, though some sweet saints there be who can walk unsmirched in the midst of corruption."
"And Hyacinth? She can walk scatheless through that Court furnace. She writes of Whitehall as if it were
Paradise."
"Hyacinth has a husband to take care of her; a man with a brave headpiece of his own, who lets her spark it
with the fairest company in the town, but would make short work of any fop who dared attempt the insolence
of a suitor. Hyacinth has seen the worst and the best of two Courts, and has an experience of the Palais Royal
and St. Germain which should keep her safe at Whitehall."
Sir John and his daughter spent half a day together in the garden and the parlour, where the traveller was
entertained with a collation and a bottle of excellent Beaujolais before his horse was brought to the door.
Angela saw him mount, and ride slowly away in the melancholy afternoon light, and she felt as if he were
riding out of her life for ever. She went back to her aunt's room with an aching heart. Had not that kind lady,
her mother in all the essentials of maternal love, been so near the end of her days, and so dependent on her
niece's affection, the girl would have clung about her father's neck, and implored him to go no more
a-soldiering, and to make himself a home with her in England.
CHAPTER III. 28
CHAPTER IV.
THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW.
The reverend mother lingered till the beginning of summer, and it was on a lovely June evening, while the
nightingales were singing in the convent garden, that the holy life slipped away into the Great Unknown. She
died as a child falls asleep, the saintly grey head lying peacefully on Angela's supporting arm, the last look of
the dying eyes resting on that tender nurse with infinite love.
She was gone, and Angela felt strangely alone. Her contemporaries, the chosen friend who had been to her
almost as a sister, the girls by whose side she had sat in class, had all left the convent. At twenty-one years of
age, she seemed to belong to a former generation; most of the pupils had finished their education at seventeen
or eighteen, and had returned to their homes in Flanders, France, or England. There had been several English
pupils, for Louvain and Douai had for a century been the seminaries for English Romanists.
The pupils of to-day were Angela's juniors, with whom she had nothing in common, except to teach English
to a class of small Flemings, who were almost unteachable.
She had heard no more from her father, and knew not where or with whom he might have cast in his lot. She
wrote to him under cover to her sister; but of late Hyacinth's letters had been rare and brief, only long enough,
indeed, to apologise for their brevity. Lady Fareham had been in London or at Hampton Court from the
beginning of the previous winter. There was talk of the plague having come to London from Amsterdam, that
the Privy Council was sitting at Sion House, instead of in London, that the judges had removed to Windsor,
and that the Court might speedily remove to Salisbury or Oxford. "And if the Court goes to Oxford, we shall
go to Chilton," wrote Hyacinth; and that was the last of her communications.
July passed without news from father or sister; and Angela grew daily more uneasy about both. The great
horror of the plague was in the air. It had been raging in Amsterdam in the previous summer and autumn, and
a nun had brought the disease to Louvain, where she might have died in the convent infirmary but for
Angela's devoted attention. She had assisted the over-worked infirmarian at a time of unusual sickness--for
there was a good deal of illness among the nuns and pupils that summer--mostly engendered of the fear lest
the pestilence in Holland should reach Flanders. Doctor and infirmarian had alike praised the girl's quiet
courage, and her instinct for doing the right thing.
Remembering all the nun had told of the horrors of Amsterdam, Angela awaited with fear and trembling for
news from London; and as the summer wore on, every news-letter that reached the Ursulines brought tidings
of increasing sickness in the great prosperous city, which was being gradually deserted by all who could
afford to travel. The Court had moved first to Hampton Court, in June, and later to Salisbury, where again the
French Ambassador's people reported strange horrors--corpses found lying in the street hard by their
lodgings--the King's servants sickening. The air of the cathedral city was tainted--though deaths had been few
as compared with London, which was becoming one vast lazar-house--and it was thought the Court and
Ambassadors would remove themselves to Oxford, where Parliament was to assemble in the autumn, instead
of at Westminster.
Most alarming of all was the news that the Queen-mother had fled with all her people, and most of her
treasures, from her palace at Somerset House--for Henrietta Maria was not a woman to fly before a phantom
fear. She had seen too much of the stern realities of life to be scared by shadows; and she had neither
establishment nor power in France equal to those she left in England. In Paris the daughter of the great Henry
was a dependent. In London she was second only to the King; and her Court was more esteemed than
Whitehall.
CHAPTER IV. 29
"If she has fled, there must be reason for it," said the newly elected Superior, who boasted of correspondents
at Paris, notably a cousin in that famous convent, the Visitandines de Chaillot, founded by Queen Henrietta,
and which had ever been a centre of political and religious intrigue, the most fashionable, patrician, exalted,
and altogether worldly establishment.
Alarmed at this dismal news, Angela wrote urgently to her sister, but with no effect; and the passage of every
day, with occasional rumours of an increasing death-rate in London, strengthened her fears, until terror nerved
her to a desperate resolve. She would go to London to see her sister; to nurse her if she were sick; to mourn
for her if she were dead.
The Superior did all she could to oppose this decision, and even asserted authority over the pupil who, since
her eighteenth year had been released from discipline, subject but to the lightest laws of the convent. As the
great-niece and beloved child of the late Superior she had enjoyed all possible privileges; while the liberal
sum annually remitted for her maintenance gave her a certain importance in the house.
And now on being told she must not go, her spirit rose against the Superior's authority.
"I recognise no earthly power that can keep me from those I love in their time of peril!" she said.
"You do not know that they are in sickness or danger. My last letters from Paris stated that it was only the low
people whom the contagion in London was attacking."
"If it was only the low people, why did the Queen-mother leave? If it was safe for my sister to be in London it
would have been safe for the Queen."
"Lady Fareham is doubtless in Oxfordshire."
"I have written to Chilton Abbey as well as to Fareham House, and I can get no answer. Indeed, reverend
mother, it is time for me to go to those to whom I belong. I never meant to stay in this house after my aunt's
death. I have only been waiting my father's orders. If all be well with my sister I shall go to the Manor Moat,
and wait his commands quietly there. I am home-sick for England."
"You have chosen an ill time for home-sickness, when a pestilence is raging."
Argument could not touch the girl, whose mind was braced for battle. The reverend mother ceded with as
good a grace as she could assume, on the top of a very arbitrary temper. An English priest was heard of who
was about to travel to London on his return to a noble friend and patron in the north of England, in whose
house he had lived before the troubles; and in this good man's charge Angela was permitted to depart, on a
long and weary journey by way of Antwerp and the Scheldt. They were five days at sea, the voyage
lengthened by the almost unprecedented calm which had prevailed all that fatal summer--a weary voyage in a
small trading vessel, on board which Angela had to suffer every hardship that a delicate woman can be
subjected to on board ship: a wretched berth in a floating cellar called a cabin, want of fresh water, of female
attendance, and of any food but the coarsest. These deprivations she bore without a murmur. It was only the
slowness of the passage that troubled her.
The great city came in view at last, the long roof of St. Paul's dominating the thickly clustered gables and
chimneys, and the vessel dropped anchor opposite the dark walls of the Tower, whose form had been made
familiar to Angela by a print in a History of London, which she had hung over many an evening in Mother
Anastasia's parlour. A row-boat conveyed her and her fellow-traveller to the Tower stairs, where they landed,
the priest being duly provided with an efficient voucher that they came from a city free of the plague. Yes, this
was London. Her foot touched her native soil for the first time after fifteen years of absence. The
good-natured priest would not leave her till he had seen her in charge of an elderly and most reputable
CHAPTER IV. 30
waterman, recommended by the custodian of the stairs. Then he bade her an affectionate adieu, and fared on
his way to a house in the city, where one of his kinsfolk, a devout Catholic, dwelt quietly hidden from the
public eye, and where he would rest for the night before setting out on his journey to the north.
After the impetuous passage through the deep, dark arch of the bridge, the boat moved slowly up the river in
the peaceful eventide, and Angela's eyes opened wide with wonder as she looked on the splendours of that
silent highway, this evening verily silent, for the traffic of business and pleasure had stopped in the terror of
the pestilence, like a clock that had run down. It was said by one who had seen the fairest cities of Europe that
"the most glorious sight in the world, take land and water together, was to come upon a high tide from
Gravesend, and shoot the bridge to Westminster;" and to the convent-bred maiden how much more
astonishing was that prospect!
The boat passed in front of Lord Arundel's sumptuous mansion, with its spacious garden, where marble
statues showed white in the midst of quincunxes, and prim hedges of cypress and yew; past the Palace of the
Savoy, with its massive towers, battlemented roof, and double line of mullioned windows fronting the river;
past Worcester House, where Lord Chancellor Hyde had been living in a sober splendour, while his princely
mansion was building yonder on the Hounslow Road, or that portion thereof lately known as Piccadilly. That
was the ambitious pile of which Hyacinth had written, a house of clouded memories and briefest tenure;
foredoomed to vanish like a palace seen in a dream; a transient magnificence, indescribable; known for a little
while opprobriously as Dunkirk House, the supposed result of the Chancellor's too facile assistance in the
surrender of that last rag of French territory. The boat passed before Rutland House and Cecil House, some
portion of which had lately been converted into the Middle Exchange, the haunt of fine ladies and Golconda
of gentlewomen milliners, favourite scene for assignations and intrigues; and so by Durham House, where in
the Protector Seymour's time the Royal Mint had been established; a house whose stately rooms were haunted
by tragic associations, shadows of Northumberland's niece and victim, hapless Jane Grey, and of fated
Raleigh. Here, too, commerce shouldered aristocracy, and the New Exchange of King James's time competed
with the Middle Exchange of later date, providing more milliners, perfumers, glovers, barbers, and toymen,
and more opportunity for illicit loves and secret meetings.
Before Angela's eyes those splendid mansions passed like phantom pictures. The westering sunlight showed
golden above the dark Abbey, while she sat silent, with awe-stricken gaze, looking out upon this widespread
city that lay chastened and afflicted under the hand of an angry God. The beautiful, gay, proud, and splendid
London of the West, the new London of Covent Garden, St. James's Street, and Piccadilly, whose glories her
sister's pen had depicted with such fond enthusiasm, was now deserted by the rabble of quality who had
peopled its palaces, while the old London of the East, the historic city, was sitting in sackcloth and ashes, a
place of lamentations, a city where men and women rose up in the morning hale and healthy, and at night-fall
were carried away in the dead-cart, to be flung into the pit where the dead lay shroudless and unhonoured.
How still and sweet the summer air seemed in that sunset hour; how placid the light ripple of the incoming
tide; how soothing even the silence of the city! And yet it all meant death. It was but a few months since the
fatal infection had been brought from Holland in a bundle of merchandise: and, behold, through city and
suburbs, the pestilence had crept with slow and stealthy foot, now on this side of a street, now on another. The
history of the plague was like a game at draughts, where man after man vanishes off the board, and the game
can only end by exhaustion.
"See, mistress, yonder is Somerset House," said the boatman, pointing to one of the most commanding
façades in that highway of palaces. "That is the palace which the Queen-mother has raised from the ashes of
the ruins her folly made, for the husband who loved her too well. She came back to us no wiser for years of
exile--came back with her priests and her Italian singing-boys, her incense-bearers and golden candlesticks
and gaudy rags of Rome. She fled from England with the roar of cannon in her ears, and the fear of death in
her heart. She came back in pride and vain-glory, and boasted that had she known the English people better,
she would never have gone away; and she has squandered thousands in yonder palace, upon floors of coloured
CHAPTER IV. 31
woods, and Italian marbles--the people's money, mark you, money that should have built ships and fed sailors;
and she meant to end her days among us. But a worse enemy than Cromwell has driven her out of the house
that she made beautiful for herself; and who knows if she will ever see London again?"
"Then those were right who told me that it was for fear of the plague her Majesty left London?" said Angela.
"For what else should she flee? She was loth enough to leave, you may be sure, for she had seated herself in
her pride yonder, and her Court was as splendid, and more looked up to than Queen Catherine's. The
Queen-mother is the prouder woman, and held her head higher than her son's wife has ever dared to hold hers;
yet there are those who say King Charles's widow has fallen so low as to marry Lord St. Albans, a son of
Belial, who would hazard his immortal soul on a cast of the dice, and lose it as freely as he has squandered his
royal mistress's money. She paid for Jermyn's feasting and wine-bibbing in Paris, 'tis said, when her son and
his friends were on short commons."
"You do wrong to slander that royal lady," remonstrated Angela. "She is of all widows the saddest and most
desolate--ever the mark of evil fortune. Even in the glorious year of her son's restoration sorrow pursued her,
and she had to mourn a daughter and a son. She is a most unhappy lady."
"You would scarcely say as much, young madam, had you seen her in her pomp and power yonder. And as for
Lord St. Albans, if he is not her husband--! Well, thou art a young innocent thing--so I had best hold my
peace. Both palaces are empty and forsaken, both Whitehall and Somerset House. The rats and the spiders can
take their own pleasure in the rooms that were full of music and dancing, card-playing and feasting, two or
three months ago. Why, there was no better sight in London, after the dead-cart, than to watch the train of
carriages and horsemen, carts and wagons, upon any of the great high-roads, carrying the people of London
away to the country, as if the whole city had been moving in one mass like a routed army."
"But in palaces and noblemen's houses surely there would be little danger?" said Angela. "Plagues and fevers
are the outcome of hunger and uncleanliness, and all such evils as the poor have to suffer."
"Nay, but the pestilence that walketh in darkness is no respecter of persons," answered the grim boatman. "I
grant you that death has dealt hardest with the poor who dwell in crowded lanes and alleys. But now the very
air reeks with poison. It may be carried in the folds of a woman's gown, or among the feathers of a courtier's
hat. They are wise to go who can go. It is only such as I, who have to work for my grandchildren's bread, that
must needs stay."
"You speak like one who has seen better days," said Angela.
"I was a sergeant in Hampden's regiment, madam, and went all through the war. When the King came back I
had friends who stood by me, and bought me this boat. I was used to handle an oar in my boyhood, when I
lived on a little bit of a farm that belonged to my father, between Reading and Henley. I was oftener on the
water than on the land in those days. There are some who have treated me roughly because I fought against
the late King; but folks are beginning to find out that the Brewer's disbanded red-coats can be honest and
serviceable in time of peace."
After passing the Queen-mother's desolate palace the boat crept along near the Middlesex shore, till it stopped
at the bottom of a flight of stone steps, against which the tide washed with a pleasant rippling sound, and
above which there rose the walls of a stately building facing south-west; small as compared with Somerset
and Northumberland houses, midway between which it stood, yet a spacious and noble mansion, with a richly
decorated river-front, lofty windows with sculptured pediments, floriated cornice, and two side towers topped
with leaded cupolas, the whole edifice gilded by the low sun, and very beautiful to look upon, the windows
gleaming as if there were a thousand candles burning within, a light that gave a false idea of life and festivity,
since that brilliant illumination was only a reflected glory.
CHAPTER IV. 32
"This, madam, is Fareham House," said the boatman, holding out his hand for his fee.
He charged treble the sum he would have asked half a year ago. In this time of evil those intrepid spirits who
still plied their trades in the tainted city demanded a heavy fee for their labour; and it would have been hard to
dispute their claim, since each man knew that he risked his life, and that the limbs which toiled to-day might
be lifeless clay to-night. There was an awfulness about the time, a taste and odour of death mixed with all the
common things of daily life, a morbid dwelling upon thoughts of corruption, a feverish expectancy of the end
of all things, which no man can rightly conceive who has not passed through the Valley of the Shadow of
Death.
Angela paid the man his price without question. She stepped lightly from the boat, while he deposited her two
small leather-covered trunks on the stone landing-place in front of the Italian terrace which occupied the
whole length of the façade. She went up a flight of marble steps, to a door facing the river. Here she rang a
bell which pealed long and loud over the quiet water, a bell that must have been heard upon the Surrey shore.
Yet no one opened the great oak door; and Angela had a sudden sinking at the heart as the slow minutes
passed and brought no sound of footsteps within, no scrooping of a bolt to betoken the opening of the door.
"Belike the house is deserted, madam," said the boatman, who had moored his wherry to the landing-stage,
and had carried the two trunks to the doorstep. "You had best try if the door be fastened or no. Stay!" he cried
suddenly, pointing upwards, "Go not in, madam, for your life! Look at the red cross on the door, the sign of a
plague-stricken house."
Angela looked up with awe and horror. A great cross was smeared upon the door with red paint, and above it
some one had scrawled the words, "Lord, have mercy upon us!"
And the sister she loved, and the children whose faces she had never seen, were within that house, sick and in
peril of death, perhaps dying--or dead! She did not hesitate for an instant, but took hold of the heavy iron ring
which served as a handle for the door and tried to open it.
"I have no fear for myself," she said to the boatman; "I have nursed the sick and the fever-stricken, and am not
afraid of contagion--and there are those within whom I love. Good night, friend."
The handle of the door turned somewhat stiffly in her hand, but it did turn, and the door opened, and she stood
upon the threshold looking into a vast hall that was wrapped in shadow, save for a shaft of golden light that
streamed from an oval window on the staircase. Other windows there were on each side of the door, shuttered
and barred.
Seeing her enter the house, the old Cromwellian shrugged his shoulders, shook his head despondently, shoved
the two trunks hastily over the threshold, ran back to his boat, and pushed off.
"God guard thy young life, mistress!" he cried, and the wherry shot out into the stream.
There had been silence on the river, the silence of a deserted city at eventide; but that had seemed as nothing
to the stillness of this marble-paved hall, where the sunset was reflected on the dark oak panelling in one lurid
splash like blood.
Not a mortal to be seen. Not a sound of voice or footstep. A crowd of gods and goddesses in draperies of
azure and crimson, purple and orange, looked down from the ceiling. Curtains of tawny velvet hung beside the
shuttered windows. A great brazen candelabrum, filled with half-consumed candles, stood tall and splendid at
the foot of a wide oak staircase, the banister-rail whereof was cushioned with tawny velvet. Splendour of
fabric, wood and marble, colour and gilding, showed on every side; but of humanity there was no sign.
CHAPTER IV. 33
Angela shuddered at the sight of all that splendour, as if death were playing hide and seek in those voluminous
curtains, or were lurking in the deep shadow which the massive staircase cast across the hall. She looked
about her, full of fear, then seeing a silver bell upon the table, she took it up and rang it loudly. Upon the same
carved ebony table there lay a plumed hat, a cane with an amber handle, and a velvet cloak neatly folded, as if
placed ready for the master of the house, when he went abroad; but looking at these things closely, even in
that dim light, she saw that cloak and hat were white with dust, and, more even than the silence, that spectacle
of the thick dust on the dark velvet impressed her with the idea of a deserted house.
She had no lack of courage, this pupil of the Flemish nuns, and her footstep did not falter as she went quickly
up the broad staircase until she found herself in a spacious gallery, and amidst a flood of light, for the
windows on this upper or noble floor were all unshuttered, and the sunset streamed in through the lofty Italian
casements. Fareham House was built upon the plan of the Hôtel de Rambouillet, of which the illustrious
Catherine de Vivonne was herself at once owner and architect. The staircase, instead of being a central
feature, was at the western end of the house, allowing space for an unbroken suite of rooms communicating
one with the other, and terminating in an apartment with a fine oriel window looking east.
The folding doors of a spacious saloon stood wide open, and Angela entered a room whose splendour was a
surprise to her who had been accustomed to the sober simplicity of a convent parlour and the cold grey walls
of the refectory, where the only picture was a pinched and angular Virgin by Memling, and the only ornament
a crucifix of ebony and brass.
Here for the first time she beheld a saloon for whose decoration palaces had been ransacked and churches
desecrated--the stolen treasures of many an ancestral mansion, spoil of rough soldiery or city rabble, things
that had been slyly stowed away by their possessors during the stern simplicity of the Commonwealth, and
had been brought out of their hiding-places and sold to the highest bidder. Gold and silver had been melted
down in the Great Rebellion; but art treasures would not serve to pay soldiers or to buy ammunition; so these
had escaped the melting-pot. At home and abroad the storehouses of curiosity merchants had been explored to
beautify Lady Fareham's reception-rooms; and in the fading light Angela gazed upon hangings that were
worthy of a royal palace, upon Italian crystals and Indian carvings, upon ivory and amber and jade and jasper,
upon tables of Florentine mosaic, and ebony cabinets incrusted with rare agates, and upon pictures in frames
of massive and elaborate carving, Venetian mirrors which gave back the dying light from a thousand facets,
curtains and portières of sumptuous brocade, gold-embroidered, gorgeous with the silken semblance of
peacock plumage, done with the needle, from the royal manufactory of the Crown Furniture at the Gobelins.
She passed into an ante-room, with tapestried walls, and a divan covered with raised velvet, a music desk of
gilded wood, and a spinet, on which was painted the story of Orpheus and Eurydice. Beyond this there was the
dining-room, more soberly though no less richly furnished than the saloon. Here the hangings were of
Cordovan leather, stamped and gilded with _fleur-de-lys_, suggesting a French origin, and indeed these very
hangings had been bought by a Dutch Jew dealer in the time of the Fronde, had belonged to the hated minister
Mazarin, and had been sold among other of his effects when he fled from Paris: to vanish for a brief season
behind the clouds of public animosity, and to blaze out again, an elderly phoenix, in a new palace, adorned
with new treasures of art and industry that made royal princes envious.
Angela gazed on all this splendour as one bewildered. In front of that gilded wall, quivering in mid-air, as if it
had been painted upon the shaft of light that streamed in from the tall window, her fancy pictured the
blood-red cross and the piteous legend, "Lord, have mercy on us!" written in the same blood colour. For
herself she had neither horror of the pestilence nor fear of death. Religion had familiarised her mind with the
image of the destroyer. From her childhood she had been acquainted with the grave, and with visions of a
world beyond the grave. It was not for herself she trembled, but for her sister, and her sister's children; for
Lord Fareham, whose likeness she recalled even at this moment, the grave dark face which Hyacinth had
shown her on the locket she wore upon her neck, the face which Sir John said reminded him of Strafford.
CHAPTER IV. 34
"He has just that fatal look," her father had told her afterwards when they talked of Fareham, "the look that
men saw in Wentworth's face when he came from Ireland, and in his Majesty's countenance, after
Wentworth's murder."
While she stood in the dying light, wavering for a moment, doubtful which way to turn--since the room had
no less than three tall oak doors, two of them ajar--there came a pattering upon the polished floor, a
scampering of feet that were lighter and quicker than those of the smallest child, and the first living creature
Angela saw in that silent house came running towards her. It was only a little black-and-tan spaniel, with long
silky hair and drooping ears, and great brown eyes, fond and gentle, a very toy and trifle in the canine
kingdom; yet the sight of that living thing thrilled her awe-stricken heart, and her tears came thick and fast as
she knelt and took the little dog in her arms and pressed him against her bosom, and kissed the cold muzzle,
and looked, half laughing, half crying, into the pathetic brown eyes.
"At least there is life near. This dog would not be left in a deserted house," she thought, as the creature
trembled against her bosom and licked the hand that held him.
The pattering was repeated in the adjoining room, and another spaniel, which might have been twin brother of
the one she held, came through the half open door, and ran to her, and set up a jealous barking which
reverberated in the lofty room, and from within that unseen chamber on the other side of the door there came a
groan, a deep and hollow sound, as of mortal agony.
She set down the dog in an instant, and was on her feet again, trembling but alert. She pushed the door a little
wider and went into the next apartment, a bedroom more splendid than any bed-chamber her fancy had ever
depicted when she read of royal palaces.
The walls were hung with Mortlake tapestries, representing in four great panels the story of Perseus and
Andromeda, and the Rape of Proserpine. To her who knew not the old Greek fables those figures looked
strangely diabolical. Naked maiden and fiery dragon, flying horse and Greek hero, Demeter and Persephone,
hell-god and chariot, seemed alike demonaic and unholy, seen in the dim light of expiring day. The high
chimney-piece, with its Oriental jars, blood-red and amber, faced her as she entered the room, and opposite
the three tall windows stood the state bed, of carved ebony, the posts adorned with massive bouquets of
chased silver flowers, the curtains of wine coloured velvet, heavy with bullion fringes. One curtain had been
looped back, showing the amber satin lining, and on this bed of state lay a man, writhing in agony, with one
bloodless hand plucking at the cambric upon his bosom, while with the other he grasped the ebony bed-post in
a paroxysm of pain.
Angela knew that dark and powerful face at the first glance, though the features were distorted by suffering.
This sick man, the sole occupant of a deserted mansion, was her brother-in-law, Lord Fareham. A large
high-backed armchair stood beside the bed, and on this Angela seated herself. She recollected the Superior's
injunction just in time to put one of the anti-pestilential lozenges into her mouth before she bent over the
sufferer, and took his clammy hand in hers, and endured the acrimony of his poisonous breath. That anxious
gaze, the dark yellow complexion, and those great beads of sweat that poured down the pinched countenance
too plainly indicated the disease which had desolated London. The Moslem's invisible plague-angel had
entered this palace, and had touched the master with his deadly lance. That terrible Presence, which for the
most part had been found among the dwellings of the poor, was here amidst purple and fine linen, here on this
bed of state, enthroned in ebony and silver, hung round with velvet and bullion. She needed not to discover
the pestilential spots beneath that semi-diaphanous cambric which hung loose upon the muscular frame, to be
convinced of the cruel fact. Here, abandoned and alone, lay the master of the house, with nothing better than a
pair of spaniels for his companions, and neither nurse nor watcher, wife nor friend, to help him towards
recovery, or to comfort his passing soul.
One of the little dogs leapt on the bed, and licked his master's face again and again, whining piteously
CHAPTER IV. 35
between whiles.
The sick man looked at Angela with awful, unseeing eyes, and then burst into a wild laugh--
"See them run, the crop-headed clod-hoppers!" he cried. "Ride after them--mow them down--scatter the rebel
clot-pols! The day is ours!" And then, passing from English to French, from visions of Lindsey and Rupert
and the pursuit at Edgehill to memories of Condé and Turenne, he shouted with the voice that was like the
sound of a trumpet, "_Boutte-selle! boutte-selle! Monte à cheval! monte à cheval! à l'arme, à l'arme!_"
He was in the field of battle again. His wandering wits had carried him back to his first fight, when he was a
lad in his father's company of horse, following the King's fortunes, breathing gunpowder, and splashed with
human blood for the first time--when it was not so long since he had been blooded at the death of his first fox.
He was a young man again, with the Prince, that Bourbon prince and hero whom he loved and honoured far
above any of his own countrymen.
"_O, la folle entreprise du Prince de Condé_," he sang, waving his hand above his head, while the spaniels
barked loud and shrill, adding their clamour to his. He raved of battles and sieges. He was lying in the
trenches, in cold and rain and wind--in the tempestuous darkness. He was mounting the breach at Dunkirk
against the Spaniard; at Charenton in a hand-to-hand fight with Frondeurs. He raved of Châtillon and Chanleu,
and the slaughter of that fatal day when Condé mourned a friend and each side lost a leader. Fever gave force
to gesture and voice; but in the midst of his ravings he fell back, half fainting, upon the pillow, his heart
beating in a tumult which fluttered the lace upon the bosom of his shirt, while the acrid drops upon his brow
gathered thicker than poisonous dew. Angela remembered how last year in Holland these death-like sweats
had not always pointed to a fatal result, but in some cases had afforded an outlet to the pestilential influences,
though in too many instances they had served only to enfeeble the patient, the fire of disease still burning,
while the damps of approaching dissolution oozed from the fevered body--flame within and ice without.
CHAPTER V.
A MINISTERING ANGEL.
Angela flung off hood and mantle, and looked anxiously round the room. There were some empty phials and
ointment boxes, some soiled linen rags and wet sponges, upon a table near the bed, and the chamber reeked
with the odour of drugs, hartshorn and elder vinegar, cantharides, and aloes; enough to show that a doctor had
been there, and that there had been some attempt at nursing the patient. But she had heard how in Holland the
nurses had sometimes robbed and abandoned their charges, taking advantage of the confusions and
uncertainties of that period of despair, quick and skilful to profit by sudden death, and the fears and agonies of
relatives and friends, whose grief made plunder easy. She deemed it likely that one of those devilish women
had first pretended to succour, and had then abandoned Lord Fareham to his fate, after robbing his house.
Indeed, the open doors of a stately inlaid wardrobe between two windows over against the bed, and the
confused appearance of the clothes and linen on the shelves, indicated that it had been ransacked by hasty
hands; while, doubtless, there had been many valuables lying loose about a house where there was every
indication of a careless profusion.
"Alas! poor gentleman, to be left by some mercenary wretch--left to die like the camel in the desert!"
She bent over him, and laid her hand with gentle firmness upon his death-cold forehead.
"What! are there saints and angels in hell as well as felons and devils?" he cried, clutching her by the wrist,
and looking up at her with distended eyes, in which the natural colour of the eye-ball was tarnished almost to
blackness with injected blood.
CHAPTER V. 36
For long and lonely hours, that seemed an eternity, he had been tossing in a burning fever upon that
disordered bed, until he verily believed himself in a place of everlasting torment. He had that strange, double
sense which goes with delirium--the consciousness of his real surroundings, the tapestry and furniture of his
own chamber, and yet the conviction that this was hell, and had always been hell, and that he had descended
to this terrible under-world through infinite abysses of darkness. The glow of sunset had been to him the fierce
light of everlasting flames; the burning of fever was the fire that is never quenched; the pain that racked his
limbs was the worm that dieth not. And now in his torment there came the vision of a seraphic face bending
over him in gentle solicitude; a face that brought comfort with it, even in the midst of his agony. After that
one wild question he sank slowly back upon the pillows, and lay faint and weak, his breathing scarce audible.
Angela laid her fingers on his wrist. The pulse was fluttering and intermittent.
She remembered every detail of her aunt's treatment of the plague-patient in the convent infirmary, and how
the turning-point of the malady and beginning of cure had seemed to be brought about by a draught of strong
wine which the reverend mother had made her give the poor fainting creature at a crisis of extreme weakness.
She looked about the room for any flask which might contain wine; but there was nothing there except the
apothecary's phials and medicaments.
It was dusk already, and she was alone in a strange house. It would seem no easy task to find what she
wanted, but the case was desperate, and she knew enough of this mysterious disease to know that if the patient
could not rally speedily from his prostrate condition the end must be near. With steady brain she set herself to
face the difficulty--first to administer something which should sustain the sick man's strength, and then,
without loss of time, to seek a physician, and bring him to that deserted bed. Wine was the one thing she could
trust to in this crisis; for of the doses and lotions on yonder table she knew nothing, nor had her experience
made her a believer in the happy influence of drugs.
Her first search must be for light with which to explore the lower part of the house, where in pantry or
stillroom, or, if not above ground, in the cellars, she must find what she wanted. Surely somewhere in that
spacious bed-chamber there would be tinder-box and matches. There were a pair of silver candlesticks on the
dressing-table, with thick wax candles burnt nearly to the sockets.
A careful search at last discovered a tinder-box and matches in a dark angle of the fireless hearth, hidden
behind the heavy iron dog. She struck a light, kindled her match, and lighted a candle, the sick man's eyes
following all her movements, but his lips mute. As she went out of the door he called after her--
"Leave me not, thou holy visitant--leave not my soul in hell!"
"I will return!" she cried. "Have no fear, sir; I go to fetch some wine."
Her errand was not done quickly. Amidst all the magnificence she had noted on her journey through the long
suite of reception-rooms--the littered treasures of amber and gold, and ivory and porcelain and silver--she had
seen only an empty wine-flask; so with quick footfall she ran down the wide, shallow stairs to the lower floor,
and here she found herself in a labyrinth of passages opening into small rooms and servants' offices. Here
there were darkness and gloom rather than splendour; though in many of those smaller rooms there was a
sober and substantial luxury which became the inferior apartments of a palace. She came at last to a room
which she took to be the butler's office, where there were dressers with a great array of costly Venetian glass,
and a great many pieces of silver--cups, tankards, salvers, and other ornamental plate--in presses behind
glazed doors. One of the glass panels had been broken, and the shelves in that press were empty.
Wine there was none to be found in any part of the room; but a small army of empty bottles in a corner of the
floor, and a confusion of greasy plates, knives, chicken bones, and other scraps, indicated that there had been
carousing here at no remote time.
CHAPTER V. 37
The cellars were doubtless below these offices; but the wine-cellars would assuredly be locked, and she had to
search for the keys. She opened drawer after drawer in the lower part of the presses, and at last, in an inner
and secret drawer, found a multitude of keys, some of which were provided with parchment labels, and among
these happily were two labelled "Ye great wine cellar, S." and "Ye smaller wine cellar, W."
This was a point gained; but the search had occupied a considerable time. She had yet enough candle to last
for about half an hour, and her next business was to find one of those cellars which those keys opened. She
was intensely anxious to return to her patient, having heard how in some cases unhappy wretches had leapt
from the bed of death and rushed out-of-doors, delirious, half naked, to anticipate their end by a fatal chill.
On her way to the butler's office she had seen a stone archway at the head of a flight of stairs leading down
into darkness. By this staircase she hoped to find the wine-cellars, and presently descended, her candlestick in
one hand, and the two great keys in the other. As she went down into the stone basement, which was built
with the solidity of a dungeon, she heard the plash of the tide, and felt that she was now on a level with the
river. Here she found herself again in a labyrinth of passages, with many doors standing ajar. At the end of
one passage she came to a locked door, and on trying her keys, found one of them to fit the lock; it was "Ye
great wine cellar, S.," and she understood by the initial "S." that the cellar looked south and faced the river.
She turned the heavy key with an effort that strained the slender fingers which held it; but she was
unconscious of the pain, and wondered afterwards to see her hand dented and bruised where the iron had
wrung it. The clumsy door revolved on massive hinges, and she entered a cellar so large that the light of her
candle did not reach the furthermost corners and recesses.
