The public buildings in this ward (besides the western part of the Tower above-mentioned to be within the
City) are the Custom House, Cloth-workers' Hall, Bakers' Hall, and the three parish churches of Allhallows
Barking, St. Olave Hart Street, and St. Dunstan's in the East.
The Custom House is situated on the north side of the Thames, between the Tower and Billingsgate,
consisting of two floors, in the uppermost of which, in a wainscoted magnificent room, almost the whole
length of the building, and fifteen feet in height, sit the commissioners of the customs, with their under
officers and clerks. The length of this edifice is a hundred and eighty-nine feet, and the general breadth
twenty-seven, but at the west end it is sixty feet broad. It is built of brick and stone, and covered with lead,
being adorned with the upper and lower orders of architecture.
3. Aldgate, or Ealdgate Ward. The principal streets and places in it are Aldgate Street, Berry Street, part of St.
Mary Axe, part of Leadenhall Street, part of Lime Street, Billiter Lane and Square, part of Mark Lane,
Fenchurch Street, and Crutchedfriars.
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 13
The public buildings in this ward are the African House, the Navy Office, Bricklayers' Hall, the churches of
St. Catherine Creechurch, St. James's, Duke's Place, St. Andrew Undershaft, St. Catherine Coleman, and the
Jews' Synagogues.
The Royal African House is situated on the south side of Leadenhall Street, near the east end of it. Here the
affairs of the company are transacted; but the house has nothing in it that merits a particular description.
The Navy Office is situated on the south side of Crutchedfriars, near Tower Hill, being a large, well-built pile
of buildings, and the offices for every branch of business relating to the navy admirably well disposed.
The Jews' synagogues are in Duke's Place, where, and in that neighbourhood, many of that religion inhabit.
The synagogue stands east and West, as Christian churches usually do: the great door is on the west, within
which is a long desk upon an ascent, raised above the floor, from whence the law is read. The east part of the
synagogue also is railed in, and the places where the women sit enclosed with lattices; the men sit on benches
with backs to them, running east and west; and there are abundance of fine branches for candles, besides
lamps, especially in that belonging to the Portuguese.
4. Lime Street Ward. The principal streets and places in it are part of Leadenhall Street, and Leadenhall
Market, part of Lime Street, and part of St. Mary Axe.
Leadenhall Market, the finest shambles in Europe, lies between Leadenhall Street and Fenchurch Street. Of
the three courts or yards which it consists of, the first is that at the north-east corner of Gracechurch Street,
and opens into Leadenhall Street. This court or yard contains in length from north to south 164 feet, and in
breadth from east to west eighty feet: within this court or yard, round about the same, are about 100 standing
stalls for butchers, for the selling of beef only, and therefore this court is called the beef market. These stalls
are either under warehouses, or sheltered from the weather by roofs over them. This yard is on Tuesdays a
market for leather, to which the tanners resort; on Thursdays the waggons from Colchester, and other parts,
come with baize, &c., and the fellmongers with their wool; and on Fridays it is a market for raw hides; on
Saturdays, for beef and other provisions.
The second market yard is called the Greenyard, as being once a green plot of ground; afterwards it was the
City's storeyard for materials for building and the like; but now a market only for veal, mutton, lamb, &c. This
yard is 170 feet in length from east to west, and ninety feet broad from north to south; it hath in it 140 stalls
for the butchers, all covered over. In the middle of this Greenyard market from north to south is a row of
shops, with rooms over them, for fishmongers: and on the south side and west end are houses and shops also
for fishmongers. Towards the east end of this yard is erected a fair market-house, standing upon columns, with
vaults underneath, and rooms above, with a bell tower, and a clock, and under it are butchers' stalls. The
tenements round about this yard are for the most part inhabited by cooks and victuallers; and in the passages
leading out of the streets into this market are fishmongers, poulterers, cheesemongers, and other traders in
provisions.
The third market belonging to Leadenhall is called the Herb Market, for that herbs, roots, fruits, &c., are only
there sold. This market is about 140 feet square; the west, east, and north sides had walks round them, covered
over for shelter, and standing upon columns; in which walks there were twenty-eight stalls for gardeners, with
cellars under them.
The public buildings in this ward are Leadenhall, the East India House, Pewterers' Hall, and Fletchers' Hall.
Leadenhall is situated on the south side of Leadenhall Street. It is a large stone fabric, consisting of three large
courts or yards, as has been observed already; part of it is at present a warehouse, in the occupation of the East
India Company, where the finest calicoes, and other curiosities of the Eastern part of the world, are reposited;
another part of it is for Colchester baize, and is open every Thursday and Friday. Here was also anciently a
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 14
chapel, and a fraternity of sixty priests constituted to celebrate Divine Service every day to the market people;
but was dissolved with other religious societies at the Reformation.
On the south side of Leadenhall Street also, and a little to the eastward of Leadenhall, stands the East India
House, lately magnificently built, with a stone front to the street; but the front being very narrow, does not
make an appearance answerable to the grandeur of the house within, which stands upon a great deal of
ground, the offices and storehouses admirably well contrived, and the public hall and the committee room
scarce inferior to anything of the like nature in the City.
There is not one church in this ward at present. The officers of the ward are, an alderman, his deputy, four
common-council men, four constables, two scavengers, sixteen for the wardmote inquest, and a beadle.
5. Bishopsgate Ward is divided into two parts, one within Bishopsgate, and the other without.
The streets and places in this ward, within the gate, are, all Bishopsgate Street, part of Gracechurch Street, all
Great and Little St. Helen's, all Crosby Square, all Camomile Street, and a small part of Wormwood Street,
with several courts and alleys that fall into them.
That part of this ward that lies without Bishopsgate extends northwards as far as the bars, being the bounds of
the City freedom on this side.
The principal streets and places in this ward, without the gate, are, Bishopsgate Street, Petty France, Bethlem
Court and Lane, and Devonshire Square; besides which, there are little courts and alleys without number
between Bishopsgate Street and Moorfields.
The public buildings in this ward are Leather-sellers' Hall, Gresham College, the churches of St. Botolph,
Bishopsgate, St. Ethelburga, and St. Helen.
London Workhouse, for the poor of the City of London, also stands in this ward, just without Bishopsgate,
being a long brick edifice four hundred feet in length, consisting of several work-rooms and lodging rooms for
the vagrants and parish children brought thither, who are employed in spinning wool and flax, in sewing,
knitting, or winding silk, or making their clothes or shoes, and are taught to write, read, and cast accounts. The
grown vagrants brought here for a time only are employed in washing, beating hemp, and picking oakum, and
have no more to keep them than they earn, unless they are sick; and the boys are put out apprentices to
seafaring men or artificers, at a certain age, and in the meantime have their diet, clothes, physic, and other
necessaries provided for them by the house, which is supported by private charities, by sums raised annually
by the City, or by the labour of the children, which last article produces seven or eight hundred pounds per
annum.
6. Broad Street Ward contains part of Threadneedle Street, Bartholomew Lane, part of Prince's Street, part of
Lothbury, part of Throgmorton Street, great part of Broad Street, Winchester Street, Austinfriars, part of
Wormwood Street, and part of London Wall Street, with the courts and lanes running into them.
The public buildings in this ward are Carpenters' Hall, Drapers' Hall, Merchant Taylors' Hall, the South Sea
House, the Pay Office, Allhallows on the Wall, St. Peter's Poor, the Dutch Church, St. Martin's, St. Bennet's,
St. Bartholomew's, St. Christopher's, and the French Church.
The most magnificent and beautiful edifice of the kind in this ward, and indeed in the City of London, is the
South Sea House, lately erected at the north-east corner of Threadneedle Street, near Bishopsgate Street, and
over against the church of St. Martin Outwich. It is built of stone and brick.
The several offices for transacting the business of this great company are admirably well disposed; and the
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 15
great hall for sales is nowhere to be paralleled, either in its dimensions or ornaments, any more than the
dining-room, galleries, and chambers above.
7. Cornhill Ward comprehends little more than the street of the same name, and some little lanes and alleys
that fall into it, as Castle Alley, Sweeting's or Swithin's Alley, Freeman's Yard, part of Finch Lane, Weigh
House Yard, Star Court, the north end of Birching Lane, St. Michael's Alley, Pope's Head Alley, and
Exchange Alley.
Cornhill Street may, in many respects, be looked upon as the principal street of the City of London; for here
almost all affairs relating to navigation and commerce are transacted; and here all the business relating to the
great companies and the Bank are negotiated. This street also is situated near the centre of the City, and some
say, upon the highest ground in it. It is spacious, and well built with lofty houses, four or five storeys high,
inhabited by linendrapers and other considerable tradesmen, who deal by wholesale as well as retail, and
adorned with the principal gate and front of the Royal Exchange. Here also it is said the metropolitan church
was situated, when London was an archbishopric.
Exchange Alley, so denominated from its being situated on the south side of this street, over against the Royal
Exchange, has long been famous for the great concourse of merchants and commanders of ships, and the
bargains and contracts made there and in the two celebrated coffee-houses in it, which go under the respective
names of "Jonathan's" and "Garraway's," where land, stocks, debentures, and merchandise, and everything
that has an existence in Nature, is bought, sold, and transferred from one to another; and many things
contracted for, that subsists only in the imagination of the parties.
The public buildings in this ward are, the Royal Exchange, and the churches of St. Peter and St. Michael.
The Royal Exchange is situated on the north side of Cornhill, about the middle of the street, forming an
oblong open square, the inside whereof is a hundred and forty-four feet in length from east to west, and a
hundred and seventeen in breadth from north to south; the area sixty-one square poles, on every side whereof
is a noble piazza or cloister, consisting of twenty-eight columns and arches that support the galleries above.
The length of the building on the outside is two hundred and three feet, the breadth a hundred and
seventy-one, and the height fifty- six. On the front towards Cornhill also is a noble piazza, consisting of ten
pillars; and another on the opposite side next Threadneedle Street, of as many; and in the middle of each a
magnificent gate. Over the Cornhill gate is a beautiful tower, a hundred and seventy-eight feet high, furnished
with twelve small bells for chimes; and underneath the piazzas are capacious cellars, which serve for
warehouses.
The whole building is of Portland stone, rustic work; above the arches the inward piazza is an entablament,
with fine enrichments; and on the cornice a range of pilasters, within entablature, and a spacious compass
pediment in the middle of the corners of each of the four sides. Under the pediment on the north side are the
king's arms; on the south those of the City; and on the east the arms of Sir Thomas Gresham. And under the
pediment on the west side the arms of the Company of Mercers, with their respective enrichments. The
intercolumns of the upper range are twenty-four niches, nineteen of which are filled with the statues of the
kings and queens regent of England, standing erect with their robes and regalia, except that of King James II.
and King George II., which are habited like the Caesars.
On the south side are seven niches, of which four are filled, viz.:-
1. The most easterly figure, which has this inscription in gold letters, Edvardus Primus Rex, Anno Dom. 1272.
2. Westward, Edvardus III. Rex, Anno Dom. 1329. 3. Henricus V. Rex, Anno Domini 1412. 4. Henricus VI.
Rex, Anno Domini 1422.
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 16
On the west side five niches, four of which are filled, viz.:-
1. Under the most southerly figures is subscribed in gold letters, Edvardus IV. Rex, Anno Domini 1460. 2.
Northward (the crown pendent over his head) Edvardus V. Rex, Anno Domini 1483. 3. Henricus VII. Rex,
Anno Domini 1487. 4. Henricus VIII. Rex, Anno Domini 1508.
On the north side seven niches are filled, viz.:-
1. The most westerly, subscribed in golden characters, Edvardus VI. Rex, Anno Domini 1547. 2. Maria
Regina, Anno Domini 1553. 3. Elizabetha Regina, Anno Domini 1558. 4. Is subscribed Serenissim &
Potentissim' Princip' Jacobo Primo, Mag. Brit' Fran' & Hibern' Reg. Fid. Defensori, Societas Pannitonsorum
posuit, A.D. 1684. 5. [Greek text which cannot be reproduced] Serenissimi & Religiosissimi Principis Caroli
Primi, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris; Bis Martyris (in Corpore Effigie) Impiis
Rebellium Manibus, ex hoc loco deturbata confracta, Anno Dom. 1647. Restituta hic demum collocata, Anno
Dom. 1683. Gloria Martyrii qui te fregere Rebelles non potuere ipsum quem voluere Deum. 6. Carolus
Secundus Rex, Anno Domini 1648. 7. Jacobus II. Rex, Anno Domini 1685.
On the east side five niches, one of which is vacant, the other filled, viz.:-
1. The most northerly contains two statues, viz., of King William and Queen Mary, subscribed Gulielmus III.
Rex, & Maria II. Regina, A.D. 1688. S. P. Q. Londin' Optim Principibus, P. C. 1695. 2. Anna Regina Dei
Gratia Mag. Britan' Franciae & Hiberniae, 1701. 3. George I. inscribed Georgius D. G. Magnae Britan'
Franciae & Hiberniae Rex, Anno Dom. 1714. S.P.Q.L. 4. Southerly the statue of King George II. in the
habiliment of a Caesar, wreathed on the head, and a battoon or truncheon in his hand, little differing from that
of Charles II. in the centre of the area, only in looking northward; inscribed Georgius II. D. G. Mag. Brit. Fra.
& Hib. Rex, Anno Dom. 1727. S.P.Q.L.
On the four sides of the piazza within the Exchange are twenty-eight niches, which are all vacant yet, except
one near the north-west angle, where is the figure of Sir Thomas Gresham. The piazza itself is paved with
black and white marble, and the court, or area, pitched with pebbles; in the middle whereof is the statue of
King Charles II. in a Roman habit, with a battoon in his hand, erected on a marble pedestal, about eight feet
high and looking southward; on which side of the pedestal, under an imperial crown, wings, trumpet of fame,
sceptre and sword, palm branches, &c., are these words inscribed, viz.:-
Carolo II. Caesari Britannico, Patriae Patri, Regum Optimo Clementissimo Augustissimo, Generis Humani
Deliciis, Utriusq; Fortunae Victori, Pacis Europae Arbitro, Marium Domino, ac Vindici Societatis
Mercatorum Adventur' Angliae, quae per CCCC jam prope Annos Regia benignitate floret, Fidei Intemeratae
& Gratitudinis aeternae hoc Testimonium venerabunda posuit, Anno Salutis Humanae 1684.
On the west side of the pedestal is neatly cut in relievo the figure of a Cupid reposing his right hand on a
shield containing the arms of England and France quartered, and in his left hand a rose.
On the north side are the arms of Ireland on a shield, supported by a Cupid.
On the east side the arms of Scotland, with a Cupid holding a thistle all in relievo.
The inner piazza and court are divided into several stations, or walks, where the merchants of the respective
nations, and those who have business with them, assemble distinctly; so that any merchant or commander of a
vessel is readily found, if it be known to what country he trades. The several walks are described in the
following ground-plot of the Exchange:-
0--North +--------------------+ +------------------------+ | 1 2 | | 3 4 | | +----------------+ +-------------------+ | | | 7 8 9
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 17
10 | | | 5 | 6 | 11 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | West| | +--------+ | | East 12 | | 13 14 | | 15 16 | | 17 | | | | | | | | +--------+ | | | | | |
| | | | |18 | 19 | 20 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 21 22 | | | +-----------------+ +------------------+ | | 23 24 | | 25 26 |
+---------------------+ +-----------------------+ 27--South
0. Threadneedle Street 1. East Country Walk 2. Irish Walk 3. Scotch Walk 4. Dutch and Jewellers 5. Norway
Walk 6. Silkmens Walk 7. Clothiers Walk 8. Hamburgh Walk 9. Salters Walk 10. Walk 11. American Walk
12. Castle Alley 13. Turkey Walk 14. Grocers and Druggists Walk 15. Brokers, &c of Stocks Walk 16. Italian
Walk 17. Swithin's Alley 18. East India Walk 19. Canary Walk 20. Portugal Walk 21. Barbadoes Walk. 22.
French Walk 23. Virginia Walk 24. Jamaica Walk. 25. Spanish Walk 26. Jews Walk 27. Cornhill
Near the south gate is a spacious staircase, and near the north gate another, that lead up to the galleries, on
each side whereof are shops for milliners and other trades, to the number of near two hundred, which brought
in a good revenue at first, nothing being thought fashionable that was not purchased there; but the milliners
are now dispersed all over the town, and the shops in the Exchange almost deserted.
8. Langbourn Ward, so called of a bourne, or brook, that had its source in it, and run down Fenchurch Street,
contains these principal streets: part of Lombard Street, part of Fenchurch Street, part of Lime Street, and part
of Gracechurch Street, with part of the courts, lanes, and alleys in them, particularly White Hart Court,
Exchange Alley, Sherbourne Lane, Abchurch Lane, St. Nicholas Lane, Mark Lane, Mincing Lane, Rood
Lane, Cullum Court, Philpot Lane, and Braben Court.
The public buildings in this ward are, the Post Office, Ironmongers' Hall, Pewterers' Hall; the churches of
Allhallows, Lombard Street, St. Edmund's, Lombard Street, St. Mary Woolnoth, St. Dionis Backchurch, and
St. Allhallows Staining.
The Post Office is situated on the south side of Lombard Street, near Stocks Market. It was the dwelling-house
of Sir Robert Vyner, in the reign of King Charles II. The principal entrance is out of Lombard Street, through
a great gate and passage that leads into a handsome paved court, about which are the several offices for
receiving and distributing letters, extremely well contrived.
Letters and packets are despatched from hence every Monday to France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Flanders,
Germany, Sweden, Denmark, Kent, and the Downs.
Every Tuesday to the United Netherlands, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, and to all parts of England, Scotland,
and Ireland.
Every Wednesday to Kent only, and the Downs.
Every Thursday to France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, and all parts of England and Scotland.
Every Friday to the Austrian and United Netherlands, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, and to Kent and the
Downs.
Every Saturday to all parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
The post goes also every day to those places where the Court resides, as also to the usual stations and
rendezvous of His Majesty's fleet, as the Downs, Spithead, and to Tunbridge during the season for drinking
waters, &c.
Letters and packets are received from all parts of England and Scotland, except Wales, every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday; from Wales every Monday and Friday; and from Kent and the Downs every day.
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 18
His Majesty keeps constantly, for the transport of the said letters and packets, in times of peace,
Between England and France, three packet-boats; Spain, one in a fortnight; Portugal, one ditto; Flanders, two
packet-boats; Holland, three packet-boats; Ireland, three packet-boats.
And at Deal, two packet-boats for the Downs.
Not to mention the extraordinary packet-boats, in time of war with France and Spain, to the Leeward Islands,
&c.
A letter containing a whole sheet of paper is conveyed eighty miles for 3d., and two sheets 6d. and an ounce
of letters but 1s. And above eighty miles a single letter is 4d., a double letter 8d., and an ounce 1s. 4d.
9. Billingsgate Ward is bounded by Langbourn Ward towards the north, by Tower Street Ward on the east, by
the River Thames on the south, and by Bridge Ward Within on the west. The principal streets and places in
this ward are, Thames Street, Little East Cheap, Pudding Lane, Botolph Lane, Love Lane, St. Mary Hill, and
Rood Lane.
The wharves, or quays, as they lie on the Thames side from east to west, are, Smart's Quay, Billings gate,
Little Somer's Quay, Great Somer's Quay, Botolph Wharf, Cox's Quay, and Fresh Wharf which last is the next
quay to the bridge; of which Billingsgate is much the most resorted to. It is a kind of square dock, or inlet,
having quays on three sides of it, to which the vessels lie close while they are unloading. By a statute of the
10th and 11th of William III. it was enacted, "That Billingsgate should be a free market for fish every day in
the week, except Sundays." That a fishing-vessel should pay no other toll or duty than the Act prescribes, viz.,
every salt-fish vessel, for groundage, 8d. per day, and 20d. per voyage; a lobster boat 2d. per day groundage,
and 13d. the voyage; every dogger boat, or smack with sea-fish, 2d. per day groundage, and 13d. the voyage;
every oyster vessel, 2d. per day groundage, and a halfpenny per bushel metage. And that it should be lawful
for any person who should buy fish in the said market to sell the same in any other market or place in London,
or elsewhere, by retail." And because the fishmongers used to buy up great part of the fish at Billingsgate, and
then divide the same among themselves, in order to set an extravagant price upon them, it was enacted, "That
no person should buy, or cause to be bought, in the said market of Billingsgate, any quantity of fish, to be
divided by lot among the fishmongers, or other persons, with an intent to sell them afterwards by retail; and
that no fishmonger should buy any more than for his own use, on pain of 20 pounds." And by the 6th Annae it
was enacted, "That no person should buy fish at Billingsgate to sell again in the same market; and that none
but fishermen, their wives, or servants, should sell fish by retail at Billingsgate; and that none should buy or
sell fish there before the ringing of the market bell."
The public buildings in this ward are Butchers' Hall, and the churches of St. Mary Hill, St. Margaret Pattens,
and St. George, in Botolph Lane.
10. Bridge Ward Within contains London Bridge, New Fish Street, Gracechurch Street as far as Fenchurch
Street, Thames Street from Fish Street to the Old Swan, part of St. Martin's Lane, part of St. Michael's Lane,
and part of Crooked Lane.
The public buildings in this ward are London Bridge, the Monument, Fishmongers' Hall, and the churches of
St. Magnus and St Bennet, Gracechurch Street.
The Monument stands on the west side of Fish Street Hill, a little to the northward of the bridge, and was
erected by the legislative authority, in memory of the Fire, anno 1666, and was designed by Sir Christopher
Wren. It has a fluted column, 202 feet high from the ground; the greatest diameter of the shaft 15 feet, and the
plinth, or lowest part of the pedestal, 28 feet square, and 40 feet high; the whole being of Portland stone,
except the staircase within, which is of black marble, containing 345 steps, ten inches and a half broad, and
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 19
six inches deep; and a balcony on the outside 32 feet from the top, on which is a gilded flame. The front of the
pedestal, towards the west, contains a representation of the Fire, and the resurrection of the present city out of
the ruins of the former.
11. Candlewick or Cannon Street Ward contains part of Great East Cheap, part of Candlewick, now called
Cannon Street, part of Abchurch Lane, St. Nicholas Lane, St. Clement's Lane, St. Michael's Lane, Crooked
Lane, St. Martin's Lane, St. Lawrence Poultney Lane, with the courts and alleys that fall into them.
In Cannon Street is that remarkable stone called London Stone, which has remained fixed in the ground many
hundred years, but for what end is uncertain, though supposed by some to be the place from whence the
Romans began to compute the number of miles anciently to any part of the kingdom.
12. Walbrook Ward contains the best part of Walbrook, part of Bucklersbury, the east end of Budge Row, the
north end of Dowgate, part of Cannon Street, most of Swithin's Lane, most of Bearbinder Lane, part of Bush
Lane, part of Suffolk Lane, part of Green Lattice Lane, and part of Abchurch Lane, with several courts and
lanes that fall into them.
Stocks Market consists of a pretty large square, having Cornhill and Lombard Street on the north-east, the
Poultry on the north-west, and Walbrook on the south-east. Before the Fire it was a market chiefly for fish and
flesh, and afterwards for fruit and garden stuff.
In this market Sir Robert Vyner, Bart. and Alderman, erected a marble equestrian statue of King Charles II.,
standing on a pedestal eighteen feet high, and trampling on his enemies.
The public buildings in this ward are Salters' Hall, the churches of St. Swithin and St. Stephen, Walbrook.
13. Dowgate, or Dowgate Ward, so called from the principal street, which has a steep descent or fall into the
Thames, contains part of Thames Street, part of St. Lawrence-Poultney Hill, part of Duxford Lane, part of
Suffolk Lane, part of Bush Lane, part of Dowgate Hill, Checquer Yard, Elbow Lane, and Cloak Lane; and the
southward of Thames Street, Old Swan Lane, Cole Harbour, Allhallows Lane, Campion Lane, Friars Lane,
Cozens Lane, Dowgate Dock, and the Steel Yard.
The public buildings in this ward are Tallow-chandlers' Hall, Skinners' Hall, Innholders' Hall, Plumbers' Hall,
Joiners' Hall, Watermen's Hall, and the church of Allhallows the Great.
14. Vintry Ward (which was so called from the wine merchants who landed and sold their wines here)
contains part of Thames Street, New Queen Street, Garlick Hill, College Hill, and St. Thomas Apostles.
The public buildings in this ward are Vintners' Hall, Cutlers' Hall, the churches of St. Michael Royal and St.
James, Garlick Hill.
Vintners' Hall is situated on the south side of Thames Street, between Queen Street and Garlick Hill, being
built on three sides of a quadrangle fronting the street. The rooms are large, finely wainscoted and carved,
particularly the magnificent screen at the east end of the great hall, which is adorned with two columns, their
entablature and pediment; and on acroters are placed the figure of Bacchus between several Fames, with other
embellishments; and they have a garden backwards towards the Thames.
15. Cordwainers' Street Ward, so called from the cordwainers (shoemakers), curriers, and other dealers in
leather, that inhabited that part of the town anciently, includes Bow Lane, New Queen Street, Budge Row,
Tower Royal Street, Little St. Thomas Apostle's, Pancras Lane, a small part of Watling Street, a little part of
Basing Lane, and St. Sythe's Lane.
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 20
The public buildings in this ward are the church of St. Anthony, St. Mary Aldermary, and St. Mary-le-Bow.
16. Cheap Ward. The principal streets and places in this ward are Cheapside, the Poultry, part of Honey Lane
Market, part of the Old Jewry, part of Bucklersbury, part of Pancras Lane, part of Queen Street, all
Ironmonger Lane, King Street, and St. Lawrence Lane, and part of Cateaton Street, part of Bow Lane, and all
Guildhall.
The public buildings in this ward are, Guildhall, Mercers' Chapel and Hall, Grocers' Hall, the Poultry
Compter, the churches of St. Mildred, Poultry, and St. Lawrence Jewry.
Guildhall, the town house of this great City, stands at the north end of King Street, and is a large handsome
structure, built with stone, anno 1666, the old hall having been destroyed by the Fire in 1666. By a large
portico on the south side we enter the principal room, properly called the hall, being 153 feet in length, 48 in
breadth, and 55 in height. On the right hand, at the upper end, is the ancient court of the hustings; at the other
end of the hall opposite to it are the Sheriff's Courts. The roof of the inside is flat, divided into panels; the
walls on the north and south sides adorned with four demy pillars of the Gothic order, painted white, and
veined with blue, the capitals gilt with gold, and the arms finely depicted in their proper colour, viz., at the
east the arms of St. Edward the Confessor, and of the Kings of England the shield and cross of St. George. At
the west end the arms of the Confessor, those of England and France quarterly, and the arms of England. On
the fourteen demy pillars (above the capital) are the king's arms, the arms of London, and the arms of the
twelve companies. At the east end are the King's arms carved between the portraits of the late Queen, at the
foot of an arabathram, under a rich canopy northward, and those of King William and Queen Mary southward,
painted at full length. The inter-columns are painted in imitation of porphyry, and embellished with the
portraitures, painted in full proportion, of eighteen judges, which were there put up by the City, in gratitude
for their signal service done in determining differences between landlord and tenant (without the expense of
lawsuits) in rebuilding this City, pursuant to an Act of Parliament, after the Fire, in 1666.
Those on the south side are, Sir Heneage Finch, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Sir Matthew Hale, Sir Richard
Rainsford, Sir Edward Turner, Sir Thomas Tyrrel, Sir John Archer, Sir William Morton.
On the north side are, Sir Robert Atkins, Sir John Vaughan, Sir Francis North, Sir Thomas Twisden, Sir
Christopher Turner, Sir William Wild, Sir Hugh Windham.
At the west end, Sir William Ellis, Sir Edward Thurland, Sir Timothy Littleton.
And in the Lord Mayor's Court (which is adorned with fleak stone and other painting and gilding, and also the
figures of the four cardinal virtues) are the portraits of Sir Samuel Brown, Sir John Kelynge, Sir Edward
Atkins, and Sir William Windham, all (as those above) painted in full proportion in their scarlet robes as
judges.
The late Queen Anne, in December, 1706, gave the City 26 standards, and 63 colours, to be put up in this hall,
that were taken from the French and Bavarians at the battle of Ramillies the preceding summer; but there was
found room only for 46 colours, 19 standards, and the trophy of a kettle-drum of the Elector of Bavaria's. The
colours over the Queen's picture are most esteemed, on account of their being taken from the first battalion of
French guards.
From the hall we ascend by nine stone steps to the Mayor's Court, Council Chamber, and the rest of the
apartments of the house, which, notwithstanding it may not be equal to the grandeur of the City, is very well
adapted to the ends it was designed for, namely, for holding the City courts, for the election of sheriffs and
other officers, and for the entertainment of princes, ministers of State, and foreign ambassadors, on their grand
festivals.
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 21
17. Coleman Street Ward. The principal streets in this ward are the Old Jewry, part of Lothbury, Coleman
Street, part of London Wall, and all the lower part of Moorfields without the walls.
The public buildings are Bethlem or Bedlam Hospital, Founders' Hall, Armourers' Hall, the churches of St.
Olave Jewry, St. Margaret, Lothbury, and St. Stephen, Coleman Street.
New Bethlem, or Bedlam, is situated at the south end of Moorfields, just without the wall, the ground being
formerly part of the town ditch, and granted by the City to the governors of the hospital of Old Bethlem,
which had been appropriated for the reception of lunatics, but was found too strait to contain the people
brought thither, and the building in a decaying condition.
The present edifice, called New Bedlam, was begun to be erected anno 1675, and finished the following year.
It is built of brick and stone; the wings at each end, and the portico, being each of them adorned with four
pilasters, entablature and circular pediment of the Corinthian order. Under the pediment are the King's arms,
enriched with festoons; and between the portico and each of the said wings is a triangular pediment, with the
arms of the City; and on a pediment over the gate the figures of two lunatics, exquisitely carved. The front of
this magnificent hospital is reported to represent the Escurial in Spain, and in some respects exceeds every
palace in or about London, being 528 feet in length, and regularly built. The inside, it is true, is not
answerable to the grand appearance it makes without, being but 30 feet broad, and consisting chiefly of a long
gallery in each of the two storeys that runs from one end of the house to the other; on the south side whereof
are little cells, wherein the patients have their lodgings, and on the north the windows that give light to the
galleries, which are divided in the middle by a handsome iron gate, to keep the men and women asunder.
In order to procure a person to be admitted into the hospital, a petition must be preferred to a committee of the
governors, who sit at Bedlam seven at a time weekly, which must be signed by the churchwardens, or other
reputable persons of the parish the lunatic belongs to, and also recommended to the said committee by one of
the governors; and this being approved by the president and governors, and entered in a book, upon a vacancy
(in their turn) an order is granted for their being received into the house, where the said lunatic is
accommodated with a room, proper physic and diet, gratis. The diet is very good and wholesome, being
commonly boiled beef, mutton, or veal, and broth, with bread, for dinners on Sundays, Tuesdays, and
Thursdays, the other days bread, cheese, and butter, or on Saturdays pease-pottage, rice-milk, furmity, or other
pottage, and for supper they have usually broth or milk pottage, always with bread. And there is farther care
taken, that some of the committee go on a Saturday weekly to the said hospital to see the provisions weighed,
and that the same be good and rightly expended.
18. Basinghall, or Bassishaw Ward, consisteth only of Basinghall Street, and a small part of the street along
London Wall.
The public buildings of this ward are Blackwell Hall, Masons' Hall, Weavers' Hall, Coopers' Hall, Girdlers'
Hall, and St. Michael Bassishaw Church.
Blackwell Hall is situated between Basinghall Street on the east, and Guildhall Yard on the west, being
formerly called Bakewell Hall, from the family of the Bakewells, whose mansion-house stood here anno
1315, which falling to the Crown, was purchased by the City of King Richard II., and converted into a
warehouse and market for woollen manufactures; and by an act of common council anno 1516, it was
appointed to be the only market for woollen manufactures sold in the City, except baize, the profits being
settled on Christ's Hospital, which arise from the lodging and pitching of the cloth in the respective
warehouses, there being one assigned for the Devonshire cloths, and others for the Gloucester, Worcester,
Kentish, Medley, Spanish cloths, and blankets. The profits also of the baize brought to Leadenhall are settled
on the same hospital. These cloths pay a penny a week each for pitching, and a halfpenny a week resting;
stockings and blankets pay by the pack, all which bring in a considerable revenue, being under the direction of
the governors of Christ's Hospital. This hall was destroyed by the Fire, and rebuilt by Christ's Hospital, anno
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 22
1672. The doorcase on the front towards Guildhall is of stone, adorned with two columns, entablature, and
pediment of the Doric order. In the pediment are the King's arms, and the arms of London under them,
enriched with Cupids, &c.
19. Cripplegate Ward is usually divided into two parts, viz., Cripplegate within the walls and Cripplegate
without.
The principal streets and places in Cripplegate Ward within the walls are Milk Street, great part of Honey
Lane Market, part of Cateaton Street, Lad Lane, Aldermanbury, Love Lane, Addle Street, London Wall Street,
from Little Wood Street to the postern, Philip Lane, most of Great Wood Street, Little Wood Street, part of
Hart Street, Mugwell Street, part of Fell Street, part of Silver Street, the east part of Maiden Lane, and some
few houses in Cheapside to the eastward of Wood Street.
The principal streets and places in Cripplegate Ward Without are Fore Street, and the Postern Street heading
to Moorfields, Back Street in Little Moorfields, Moor Lane, Grub Street, the south part to the posts and chain,
the fourth part of Whitecross Street as far as the posts and chain, part of Redcross Street, Beach Lane, the
south part of Golden Lane as far as the posts and chain, the east part of Golden Lane, the east part of Jewin
Street, Bridgewater Square, Brackley Street, Bridgewater Street, Silver Street, and Litton Street.
The public buildings in this ward are Sion College, Barber-Surgeons' Hall, Plasterers' Hall, Brewers' Hall,
Curriers' Hall, the churches of St. Mary Aldermanbury, St. Alphege, St. Alban, Wood Street, and St. Giles,
Cripplegate.
Sion College is situated against London Wall, a little to the eastward of Cripplegate, where anciently stood a
nunnery, and afterwards a hospital founded for a hundred blind men, anno 1320, by W. Elsing, mercer, and
called Elsing's Spittal: he afterwards founded here a priory for canons regular, which being surrendered to
King Henry VIII. anno 1530, it was purchased by Dr. Thomas White, residentiary of St. Paul's, and vicar of
St. Dunstan's in the West, for the use of the London clergy, who were incorporated by King Charles I., anno
1631, by the name of the president and fellows of Sion College, for the glory of God, the good of His Church,
redress of inconveniences, and maintaining of truth in doctrine, and love in conversation with one another,
pursuant to the donor's will; which college is governed by the president, two deans and four assistants, who
are yearly elected out of the London clergy, on the third Tuesday after Easter; but none of them reside there,
the whole being left to the care of the librarian. The great gate against London Wall is adorned with two
columns, their entablature and pitched pediment of the Tuscan order, whereon is this inscription in gold
letters:-
Collegium Sionis a Thoma White, S. T. P. Fundatum Anno Christi 1631, in Usum Clerici Lond. Bibliotheca a
Johanne Simpson, S. T. B. Extracta, a diversis Benefactor, Libris locupletata, & in posterum locupletanda.
Vade & fac similiter.
The college consists of a handsome hall, the president's lodgings, chambers for students, and a well-disposed
library, one hundred and twenty feet in length, and thirty in breadth, which is at this day very well replenished
with books, notwithstanding both library and college were burnt down anno 1666. It was rebuilt and furnished
by contributions from the London clergy and their friends. The library is kept in exact order, and there are all
imaginable conveniences for those who desire to consult their books.
20. Aldersgate Ward. The principal streets and places in this ward are, Foster Lane, Maiden Lane, Noble
Street, St. Martin's-le-Grand, Dean's Court, Round Court, Angel Street, Bull-and-Mouth Street, St. Anne's
Lane, Aldersgate Street, Goswell Street, Barbican, Long Lane, and Little Britain.
St. Martin's-le-Grand was anciently a magnificent college, founded by Jugelricus and Edwardus his brother,
anno 1056, and confirmed by William the Conqueror, by his charter, dated anno 1068, in the second year of
Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor 23
his reign, who also gave all the moorlands without Cripplegate to this college, exempting the dean and canons
from the jurisdiction of the bishop, and from all legal services, granting them soc and sac, toll and theam, with
all liberties and franchises that any church in the kingdom enjoyed.
This college was surrendered to King Edward VI. in the second year of his reign, anno 1548, and the same
year the church pulled down, and the ground leased out to persons to build upon, being highly valued on
account of the privileges annexed to it, for it still remains a separate jurisdiction. The sheriffs and magistrates
of London have no authority in this liberty, but it is esteemed part of Westminster, and subject only to the
dean and chapter of that abbey.
The public buildings in this ward are, Goldsmiths' Hall, Coachmakers' Hall, London House, Thanet House,
Cooks' Hall, the church of St. Anne within Aldersgate, St. Leonard, Foster Lane, and St. Botolph, Aldersgate.
21. Farringdon Ward within the walls, so called to distinguish it from Farringdon Ward without, was anciently
but one ward, and governed by one alderman, receiving its name of William Farendon, goldsmith, alderman
thereof, and one of the sheriffs of London who purchased the aldermanry of John le Feure, 7 Edward I., anno
1279. It afterwards descended to Nicholas Farendon, son of the said William, who was four times mayor (and
his heirs), from whence some infer that the aldermanries of London were formerly hereditary.
