The boy with fair hair lowered himself down the last few feet of rock and began to pick
his way toward the lagoon. Though he had taken off his school sweater and trailed it now from
one hand, his grey shirt stuck to him and his hair was plastered to his forehead. All round him
the long scar smashed into the jungle was a bath of heat. He was clambering heavily among the
creepers and broken trunks when a bird, a vision of red and yellow, flashed upwards with a
witch-like cry; and this cry was echoed by another.
"Hi!" it said. "Wait a minute!"
The undergrowth at the side of the scar was shaken and a multitude of raindrops fell
pattering.
"Wait a minute," the voice said. "I got caught up."
The fair boy stopped and jerked his stockings with an automatic gesture that made the
jungle seem for a moment like the Home Counties.
The voice spoke again.
"I can't hardly move with all these creeper things."
The owner of the voice came backing out of the undergrowth so that twigs scratched
on a greasy wind-breaker. The naked crooks of his knees were plump, caught and scratched by
thorns. He bent down, removed the thorns carefully, and turned around. He was shorter than
the fair boy and very fat. He came forward, searching out safe lodgments for his feet, and then
looked up through thick spectacles.
"Where's the man with the megaphone?"
The fair boy shook his head.
"This is an island. At least I think it's an island. That's a reef out in the sea. Perhaps
there aren't any grownups anywhere."
The fat boy looked startled.
"There was that pilot. But he wasn't in the passenger cabin, he was up in front."
The fair boy was peering at the reef through screwed-up eyes.
"All them other kids," the fat boy went on. "Some of them must have got out. They
must have, mustn't they?"
The fair boy began to pick his way as casually as possible toward the water. He tried to
be offhand and not too obviously uninterested, but the fat boy hurried after him.
"Aren't there any grownups at all?"
"I don't think so."The fair boy said this solemnly; but then the delight of a realized ambition overcame
him. In the middle of the scar he stood on his head and grinned at the reversed fat boy.
"No grownups!"
The fat boy thought for a moment.
"That pilot."
The fair boy allowed his feet to come down and sat on the steamy earth.
"He must have flown off after he dropped us. He couldn't land here. Not in a place
with wheels."
"We was attacked!"
"He'll be back all right."
The fat boy shook his head.
"When we was coming down I looked through one of them windows. I saw the other
part of the plane. There were flames coming out of it."
He looked up and down the scar.
"And this is what the cabin done."
The fair boy reached out and touched the jagged end of a trunk. For a moment he
looked interested.
"What happened to it?" he asked. "Where's it got to now?"
"That storm dragged it out to sea. It wasn't half dangerous with all them tree trunks
falling. There must have been some kids still in it."
He hesitated for a moment, then spoke again.
"What's your name?"
"Ralph."
The fat boy waited to be asked his name in turn but this proffer of acquaintance was
not made; the fair boy called Ralph smiled vaguely, stood up, and began to make his way once
more toward the lagoon. The fat boy hung steadily at his shoulder.
"I expect there's a lot more of us scattered about. You haven't seen any others, have
you?"
Ralph shook his head and increased his speed. Then he tripped over a branch and came
down with a crash.
The fat boy stood by him, breathing hard.
"My auntie told me not to run," he explained, "on account of my asthma."
"Ass-mar?"
"That's right. Can't catch my breath. I was the only boy in our school what had
asthma," said the fat boy with a touch of pride. "And I've been wearing specs since I was
three."He took off his glasses and held them out to Ralph, blinking and smiling, and then
started to wipe them against his grubby wind-breaker. An expression of pain and inward
concentration altered the pale contours of his face. He smeared the sweat from his cheeks and
quickly adjusted the spectacles on his nose.
"Them fruit."
He glanced round the scar.
"Them fruit," he said, "I expect--"
He put on his glasses, waded away from Ralph, and crouched down among the tangled
foliage.
"I'll be out again in just a minute--"
Ralph disentangled himself cautiously and stole away through the branches. In a few
seconds the fat boy's grunts were behind him and he was hurrying toward the screen that still
lay between him and the lagoon. He climbed over a broken trunk and was out of the jungle.
The shore was fledged with palm trees. These stood or leaned or reclined against the
light and their green feathers were a hundred feet up in the air. The ground beneath them was
a bank covered with coarse grass, torn everywhere by the upheavals of fallen trees, scattered
with decaying coconuts and palm saplings. Behind this was the darkness of the forest proper
and the open space of the scar. Ralph stood, one hand against a grey trunk, and screwed up his
eyes against the shimmering water. Out there, perhaps a mile away, the white surf flinked on a
coral reef, and beyond that the open sea was dark blue. Within the irregular arc of coral the
lagoon was still as a mountain lake--blue of all shades and shadowy green and purple. The
beach between the palm terrace and the water was a thin stick, endless apparently, for to
Ralph's left the perspectives of palm and beach and water drew to a point at infinity; and
always, almost visible, was the heat.
He jumped down from the terrace. The sand was thick over his black shoes and the
heat hit him. He became conscious of the weight of clothes, kicked his shoes off fiercely and
ripped off each stocking with its elastic garter in a single movement. Then he leapt back on
the terrace, pulled off his shirt, and stood there among the skull-like coconuts with green
shadows from the palms and the forest sliding over his skin. He undid the snake-clasp of his
belt, lugged off his shorts and pants, and stood there naked, looking at the dazzling beach and
the water.
He was old enough, twelve years and a few months, to have lost the prominent tummy
of childhood and not yet old enough for adolescence to have made him awkward. You could
see now that he might make a boxer, as far as width and heaviness of shoulders went, but there
was a mildness about his mouth and eyes that proclaimed no devil. He patted the palm trunk
softly, and, forced at last to believe in the reality of the island laughed delightedly again andstood on his head. He turned neatly on to his feet, jumped down to the beach, knelt and swept
a double armful of sand into a pile against his chest. Then he sat back and looked at the water
with bright, excited eyes.
"Ralph--"
The fat boy lowered himself over the terrace and sat down carefully, using the edge as a
seat.
"I'm sorry I been such a time. Them fruit--"
He wiped his glasses and adjusted them on his button nose. The frame had made a
deep, pink "V" on the bridge. He looked critically at Ralph's golden body and then down at his
own clothes. He laid a hand on the end of a zipper that extended down his chest.
"My auntie--"
Then he opened the zipper with decision and pulled the whole wind-breaker over his
head.
"There!"
Ralph looked at him sidelong and said nothing.
"I expect we'll want to know all their names," said the fat boy, "and make a list. We
ought to have a meeting."
Ralph did not take the hint so the fat boy was forced to continue.
"I don't care what they call me," he said confidentially, "so long as they don't call me
what they used to call me at school."
Ralph was faintly interested.
"What was that?"
The fat boy glanced over his shoulder, then leaned toward Ralph.
He whispered.
"They used to call me 'Piggy.'"
Ralph shrieked with laughter. He jumped up.
"Piggy! Piggy!"
"Ralph--please!"
Piggy clasped his hands in apprehension.
"I said I didn't want--"
"Piggy! Piggy!"
Ralph danced out into the hot air of the beach and then returned as a fighter-plane,
with wings swept back, and machine-gunned Piggy.
"Sche-aa-ow!"
He dived in the sand at Piggy's feet and lay there laughing.
"Piggy!"Piggy grinned reluctantly, pleased despite himself at even this much recognition.
"So long as you don't tell the others--"
Ralph giggled into the sand. The expression of pain and concentration returned to
Piggy's face.
"Half a sec'."
He hastened back into the forest. Ralph stood up and trotted along to the right.
Here the beach was interrupted abruptly by the square motif of the landscape; a great
platform of pink granite thrust up uncompromisingly through forest and terrace and sand and
lagoon to make a raised jetty four feet high. The top of this was covered with a thin layer of
soil and coarse grass and shaded with young palm trees. There was not enough soil for them to
grow to any height and when they reached perhaps twenty feet they fell and dried, forming a
criss-cross pattern of trunks, very convenient to sit on. The palms that still stood made a green
roof, covered on the underside with a quivering tangle of reflections from the lagoon. Ralph
hauled himself onto this platform, noted the coolness and shade, shut one eye, and decided
that the shadows on his body were really green. He picked his way to the seaward edge of the
platform and stood looking down into the water. It was clear to the bottom and bright with
the efflorescence of tropical weed and coral. A school of tiny, glittering fish flicked hither and
thither. Ralph spoke to himself, sounding the bass strings of delight.
"Whizzoh!"
Beyond the platform there was more enchantment. Some act of God--a typhoon
perhaps, or the storm that had accompanied his own arrival--had banked sand inside the
lagoon so that there was a long, deep pool in the beach with a high ledge of pink granite at the
further end. Ralph had been deceived before now by the specious appearance of depth in a
beach pool and he approached this one preparing to be disappointed. But the island ran true
to form and the incredible pool, which clearly was only invaded by the sea at high tide, was so
deep at one end as to be dark green. Ralph inspected the whole thirty yards carefully and then
plunged in. The water was warmer than his blood and he might have been swimming in a huge
bath.
Piggy appeared again, sat on the rocky ledge, and watched Ralph's green and white
body enviously.
"You can't half swim."
"Piggy."
Piggy took off his shoes and socks, ranged them carefully on the ledge, and tested the
water with one toe.
"It's hot!"
"What did you expect?""I didn't expect nothing. My auntie--"
"Sucks to your auntie!"
Ralph did a surface dive and swam under water with his eyes open; the sandy edge of
the pool loomed up like a hillside. He turned over, holding his nose, and a golden light danced
and shattered just over his face. Piggy was looking determined and began to take off his shorts.
Presently he was palely and fatly naked. He tiptoed down the sandy side of the pool, and sat
there up to his neck in water smiling proudly at Ralph.
"Aren't you going to swim?"
Piggy shook his head.
"I can't swim. I wasn't allowed. My asthma--"
"Sucks to your ass-mar!"
Piggy bore this with a sort of humble patience. "You can't half swim well."
Ralph paddled backwards down the slope, immersed his mouth and blew a jet of water
into the air. Then he lifted his chin and spoke.
"I could swim when I was five. Daddy taught me. He's a commander in the Navy.
When he gets leave he'll come and rescue us. What's your father?"
Piggy flushed suddenly.
"My dad's dead," he said quickly, "and my mum--"
He took off his glasses and looked vainly for something with which to clean them.
"I used to live with my auntie. She kept a candy store. I used to get ever so many
candies. As many as I liked. When'll your dad rescue us?"
"Soon as he can."
Piggy rose dripping from the water and stood naked, cleaning his glasses with a sock.
The only sound that reached them now through the heat of the morning was the long,
grinding roar of the breakers on the reef.
"How does he know we're here?"
Ralph lolled in the water. Sleep enveloped him like the swathing mirages that were
wrestling with the brilliance of the lagoon.
"How does he know we're here?"
Because, thought Ralph, because, because. The roar from the reef became very distant.
"They'd tell him at the airport."
Piggy shook his head, put on his flashing glasses and looked down at Ralph.
"Not them. Didn't you hear what the pilot said? About the atom bomb? They're all
dead."
Ralph pulled himself out of the water, stood facing Piggy, and considered this unusual
problem.Piggy persisted.
"This an island, isn't it?"
"I climbed a rock," said Ralph slowly, "and I think this is an island."
"They're all dead," said Piggy, "an' this is an island. Nobody don't know we're here.
Your dad don't know, nobody don't know--"
His lips quivered and the spectacles were dimmed with mist.
"We may stay here till we die."
With that word the heat seemed to increase till it became a threatening weight and the
lagoon attacked them with a blinding effulgence.
"Get my clothes," muttered Ralph. "Along there."
He trotted through the sand, enduring the sun's enmity, crossed the platform and
found his scattered clothes. To put on a grey shirt once more was strangely pleasing. Then he
climbed the edge of the platform and sat in the green shade on a convenient trunk. Piggy
hauled himself up, carrying most of his clothes under his arms. Then he sat carefully on a fallen
trunk near the little cliff that fronted the lagoon; and the tangled reflections quivered over
him.
Presently he spoke.
"We got to find the others. We got to do something."
Ralph said nothing. Here was a coral island. Protected from the sun, ignoring Piggy's
ill-omened talk, he dreamed pleasantly.
Piggy insisted.
"How many of us are there?"
Ralph came forward and stood by Piggy.
"I don't know."
Here and there, little breezes crept over the polished waters beneath the haze of heat.
When these breezes reached the platform the palm fronds would whisper, so that spots of
blurred sunlight slid over their bodies or moved like bright, winged things in the shade.
Piggy looked up at Ralph. All the shadows on Ralph's face were reversed; green above,
bright below from the lagoon. A blur of sunlight was crawling across his hair.
"We got to do something."
Ralph looked through him. Here at last was the imagined but never fully realized place
leaping into real life. Ralph's lips parted in a delighted smile and Piggy, taking this smile to
himself as a mark of recognition, laughed with pleasure.
"If it really is an island--"
"What's that?"Ralph had stopped smiling and was pointing into the lagoon. Something creamy lay
among the ferny weeds.
"A stone."
"No. A shell."
Suddenly Piggy was a-bubble with decorous excitement.
"S'right. It's a shell! I seen one like that before. On someone's back wall. A conch he
called it. He used to blow it and then his mum would come. It's ever so valuable--"
Near to Ralph's elbow a palm sapling leaned out over the lagoon. Indeed, the weight
was already pulling a lump from the poor soil and soon it would fall. He tore out the stem and
began to poke about in the water, while the brilliant fish flicked away on this side and that.
Piggy leaned dangerously.
"Careful! You'll break it--"
"Shut up."
Ralph spoke absently. The shell was interesting and pretty and a worthy plaything; but
the vivid phantoms of his day-dream still interposed between him and Piggy, who in this
context was an irrelevance. The palm sapling, bending, pushed the shell across the weeds.
Ralph used one hand as a fulcrum and pressed down with the other till the shell rose, dripping,
and Piggy could make a grab.
Now the shell was no longer a thing seen but not to be touched, Ralph too became
excited. Piggy babbled:
"--a conch; ever so expensive. I bet if you wanted to buy one, you'd have to pay pounds
and pounds and pounds--he had it on his garden wall, and my auntie--"
Ralph took the shell from Piggy and a little water ran down his arm. In color the shell
was deep cream, touched here and there with fading pink. Between the point, worn away into
a little hole, and the pink lips of the mouth, lay eighteen inches of shell with a slight spiral
twist and covered with a delicate, embossed pattern. Ralph shook sand out of the deep tube.
"--mooed like a cow," he said. "He had some white stones too, an' a bird cage with a
green parrot. He didn't blow the white stones, of course, an' he said--"
Piggy paused for breath and stroked the glistening thing that lay in Ralph's hands.
"Ralph!"
Ralph looked up.
"We can use this to call the others. Have a meeting. They'll come when they hear us--"
He beamed at Ralph.
"That was what you meant, didn't you? That's why you got the conch out of the water?"
Ralph pushed back his fair hair.
"How did your friend blow the conch?""He kind of spat," said Piggy. "My auntie wouldn't let me blow on account of my
asthma. He said you blew from down here." Piggy laid a hand on his jutting abdomen. "You
try, Ralph. You'll call the others."
Doubtfully, Ralph laid the small end of the shell against his mouth and blew. There
came a rushing sound from its mouth but nothing more. Ralph wiped the salt water off his lips
and tried again, but the shell remained silent.
"He kind of spat."
Ralph pursed his lips and squirted air into the shell, which emitted a low, farting noise.
This amused both boys so much that Ralph went on squirting for some minutes, between
bouts of laughter.
"He blew from down here."
Ralph grasped the idea and hit the shell with air from his diaphragm. Immediately the
thing sounded. A deep, harsh note boomed under the palms, spread through the intricacies of
the forest and echoed back from the pink granite of the mountain. Clouds of birds rose from
the treetops, and something squealed and ran in the undergrowth.
Ralph took the shell away from his lips.
"Gosh!"
His ordinary voice sounded like a whisper after the harsh note of the conch. He laid
the conch against his lips, took a deep breath and blew once more. The note boomed again:
and then at his firmer pressure, the note, fluking up an octave, became a strident blare more
penetrating than before. Piggy was shouting something, his face pleased, his glasses flashing.
The birds cried, small animals scuttered. Ralph's breath failed; the note dropped the octave,
became a low wubber, was a rush of air.
The conch was silent, a gleaming tusk; Ralph's face was dark with breathlessness and
the air over the island was full of bird-clamor and echoes ringing.
"I bet you can hear that for miles."
Ralph found his breath and blew a series of short blasts.
Piggy exclaimed: "There's one!"
A child had appeared among the palms, about a hundred yards along the beach. He was
a boy of perhaps six years, sturdy and fair, his clothes torn, his face covered with a sticky mess
of fruit. His trousers had been lowered for an obvious purpose and had only been pulled back
half-way. He jumped off the palm terrace into the sand and his trousers fell about his ankles;
he stepped out of them and trotted to the platform. Piggy helped him up. Meanwhile Ralph
continued to blow till voices shouted in the forest. The small boy squatted in front of Ralph,
looking up brightly and vertically. As he received the reassurance of something purposefulbeing done he began to look satisfied, and his only clean digit, a pink thumb, slid into his
mouth.
Piggy leaned down to him.
"What's yer name?"
"Johnny."
Piggy muttered the name to himself and then shouted it to Ralph, who was not
interested because he was still blowing. His face was dark with the violent pleasure of making
this stupendous noise, and his heart was making the stretched shirt shake. The shouting in the
forest was nearer.
Signs of life were visible now on the beach. The sand, trembling beneath the heat haze,
concealed many figures in its miles of length; boys were making their way toward the platform
through the hot, dumb sand. Three small children, no older than Johnny, appeared from
startlingly close at hand, where they had been gorging fruit in the forest. A dark little boy, not
much younger than Piggy, parted a tangle of undergrowth, walked on to the platform, and
smiled cheerfully at everybody. More and more of them came. Taking their cue from the
innocent Johnny, they sat down on the fallen palm trunks and waited. Ralph continued to
blow short, penetrating blasts. Piggy moved among the crowd, asking names and frowning to
remember them. The children gave him the same simple obedience that they had given to the
men with megaphones. Some were naked and carrying their clothes; others half-naked, or
more or less dressed, in school uniforms, grey, blue, fawn, jacketed, or jerseyed. There were
badges, mottoes even, stripes of color in stockings and pullovers. Their heads clustered above
the trunks in the green shade; heads brown, fair, black, chestnut, sandy, mouse-colored; heads
muttering, whispering, heads full of eyes that watched Ralph and speculated. Something was
being done.
The children who came along the beach, singly or in twos, leapt into visibility when
they crossed the line from heat haze to nearer sand. Here, the eye was first attracted to a
black, bat-like creature that danced on the sand, and only later perceived the body above it.
The bat was the child's shadow, shrunk by the vertical sun to a patch between the hurrying
feet. Even while he blew, Ralph noticed the last pair of bodies that reached the platform above
a fluttering patch of black. The two boys, bullet-headed and with hair like tow, flung
themselves down and lay grinning and panting at Ralph like dogs. They were twins, and the
eye was shocked and incredulous at such cheery duplication. They breathed together, they
grinned together, they were chunky and vital. They raised wet lips at Ralph, for they seemed
provided with not quite enough skin, so that their profiles were blurred and their mouths
pulled open. Piggy bent his flashing glasses to them and could be heard between the blasts,
repeating their names."Sam, Eric, Sam, Eric."
Then he got muddled; the twins shook their heads and pointed at each other and the
crowd laughed.
At last Ralph ceased to blow and sat there, the conch trailing from one hand, his head
bowed on his knees. As the echoes died away so did the laughter, and there was silence.
Within the diamond haze of the beach something dark was fumbling along. Ralph saw
it first, and watched till the intentness of his gaze drew all eyes that way. Then the creature
stepped from mirage on to clear sand, and they saw that the darkness was not all shadow but
mostly clothing. The creature was a party of boys, marching approximately in step in two
parallel lines and dressed in strangely eccentric clothing. Shorts, shirts, and different garments
they carried in their hands; but each boy wore a square black cap with a silver badge on it.
Their bodies, from throat to ankle, were hidden by black cloaks which bore a long silver cross
on the left breast and each neck was finished off with a hambone frill. The heat of the tropics,
the descent, the search for food, and now this sweaty march along the blazing beach had given
them the complexions of newly washed plums. The boy who controlled them was dressed in
the same way though his cap badge was golden. When his party was about ten yards from the
platform he shouted an order and they halted, gasping, sweating, swaying in the fierce light.
The boy himself came forward, vaulted on to the platform with his cloak flying, and peered
into what to him was almost complete darkness.
"Where's the man with the trumpet?"
Ralph, sensing his sun-blindness, answered him.
"There's no man with a trumpet. Only me."
The boy came close and peered down at Ralph, screwing up his face as he did so. What
he saw of the fair-haired boy with the creamy shell on his knees did not seem to satisfy him.
He turned quickly, his black cloak circling.
"Isn't there a ship, then?"
Inside the floating cloak he was tall, thin, and bony; and his hair was red beneath the
black cap. His face was crumpled and freckled, and ugly without silliness. Out of this face
stared two light blue eyes, frustrated now, and turning, or ready to turn, to anger.
"Isn't there a man here?"
Ralph spoke to his back.
"No. We're having a meeting. Come and join in."
The group of cloaked boys began to scatter from close line. The tall boy shouted at
them.
"Choir! Stand still!"Wearily obedient, the choir huddled into line and stood there swaying in the sun. None
the less, some began to protest faintly.
"But, Merridew. Please, Merridew . . . can't we?"
Then one of the boys flopped on his face in the sand and the line broke up. They
heaved the fallen boy to the platform and let him lie. Merridew, his eyes staring, made the best
of a bad job.
"All right then. Sit down. Let him alone."
"But Merridew."
"He's always throwing a faint," said Merridew. "He did in Gib.; and Addis; and at
matins over the precentor."
This last piece of shop brought sniggers from the choir, who perched like black birds
on the criss-cross trunks and examined Ralph with interest. Piggy asked no names. He was
intimidated by this uniformed superiority and the offhand authority in Merridew's voice. He
shrank to the other side of Ralph and busied himself with his glasses.
Merridew turned to Ralph.
"Aren't there any grownups?"
"No."
Merridew sat down on a trunk and looked round the circle.
"Then we'll have to look after ourselves."
Secure on the other side of Ralph, Piggy spoke timidly.
"That's why Ralph made a meeting. So as we can decide what to do. We've heard
names. That's Johnny. Those two--they're twins, Sam 'n Eric. Which is Eric--? You? No--
you're Sam--"
"I'm Sam--"
"'n I'm Eric."
"We'd better all have names," said Ralph, "so I'm Ralph."
"We got most names," said Piggy. "Got 'em just now."
"Kids' names," said Merridew. "Why should I be Jack? I'm Merridew."
Ralph turned to him quickly. This was the voice of one who knew his own mind.
"Then," went on Piggy, "that boy--I forget--"
"You're talking too much," said Jack Merridew. "Shut up, Fatty."
Laughter arose.
"He's not Fatty," cried Ralph, "his real name's Piggy!"
"Piggy!"
"Piggy!"
"Oh, Piggy!"A storm of laughter arose and even the tiniest child joined in. For the moment the boys
were a closed circuit of sympathy with Piggy outside: he went very pink, bowed his head and
cleaned his glasses again.
Finally the laughter died away and the naming continued. There was Maurice, next in
size among the choir boys to Jack, but broad and grinning all the time. There was a slight,
furtive boy whom no one knew, who kept to himself with an inner intensity of avoidance and
secrecy. He muttered that his name was Roger and was silent again. Bill, Robert, Harold,
Henry; the choir boy who had fainted sat up against a palm trunk, smiled pallidly at Ralph and
said that his name was Simon.
Jack spoke.
"We've got to decide about being rescued."
There was a buzz. One of the small boys, Henry, said that he wanted to go home.
"Shut up," said Ralph absently. He lifted the conch. "Seems to me we ought to have a
chief to decide things."
"A chief! A chief!"
"I ought to be chief," said Jack with simple arrogance, "because I'm chapter chorister
and head boy. I can sing C sharp."
Another buzz.
"Well then," said Jack, "I--"
He hesitated. The dark boy, Roger, stirred at last and spoke up.
"Let's have a vote."
"Yes!"
"Vote for chief!"
"Let's vote--"
This toy of voting was almost as pleasing as the conch. Jack started to protest but the
clamor changed from the general wish for a chief to an election by acclaim of Ralph himself.
None of the boys could have found good reason for this; what intelligence had been shown
was traceable to Piggy while the most obvious leader was Jack. But there was a stillness about
Ralph as he sat that marked him out: there was his size, and attractive appearance; and most
obscurely, yet most powerfully, there was the conch. The being that had blown that, had sat
waiting for them on the platform with the delicate thing balanced on his knees, was set apart.
"Him with the shell."
"Ralph! Ralph!"
"Let him be chief with the trumpet-thing."
Ralph raised a hand for silence.
"All right. Who wants Jack for chief?"With dreary obedience the choir raised their hands.
"Who wants me?"
Every hand outside the choir except Piggy's was raised immediately. Then Piggy, too,
raised his hand grudgingly into the air.
Ralph counted.
"I'm chief then."
The circle of boys broke into applause. Even the choir applauded; and the freckles on
Jack's face disappeared under a blush of mortification. He started up, then changed his mind
and sat down again while the air rang. Ralph looked at him, eager to offer something.
"The choir belongs to you, of course."
"They could be the army--"
"Or hunters--"
"They could be--"
The suffusion drained away from Jack's face. Ralph waved again for silence.
"Jack's in charge of the choir. They can be--what do you want them to be?"
"Hunters."
Jack and Ralph smiled at each other with shy liking. The rest began to talk eagerly.
Jack stood up.
"All right, choir. Take off your togs."
As if released from class, the choir boys stood up, chattered, piled their black cloaks on
the grass. Jack laid his on the trunk by Ralph. His grey shorts were sticking to him with sweat.
Ralph glanced at them admiringly, and when Jack saw his glance he explained.
"I tried to get over that hill to see if there was water all round. But your shell called us."
Ralph smiled and held up the conch for silence.
"Listen, everybody. I've got to have time to think things out. I can't decide what to do
straight off. If this isn't an island we might be rescued straight away. So we've got to decide if
this is an island. Everybody must stay round here and wait and not go away. Three of us--if we
take more we'd get all mixed, and lose each other--three of us will go on an expedition and find
out. I'll go, and Jack, and, and . . ."
He looked round the circle of eager faces. There was no lack of boys to choose from.
"And Simon."
The boys round Simon giggled, and he stood up, laughing a little. Now that the pallor
of his faint was over, he was a skinny, vivid little boy, with a glance coming up from under a
hut of straight hair that hung down, black and coarse.
He nodded at Ralph.
"I'll come.""And I--"
Jack snatched from behind him a sizable sheath-knife and clouted it into a trunk. The
buzz rose and died away.
Piggy stirred.
"I'll come."
Ralph turned to him.
"You're no good on a job like this."
"All the same--"
"We don't want you," said Jack, flatly. "Three's enough."
Piggy's glasses flashed.
"I was with him when he found the conch. I was with him before anyone else was."
Jack and the others paid no attention. There was a general dispersal. Ralph, Jack and
Simon jumped off the platform and walked along the sand past the bathing pool. Piggy hung
bumbling behind them.
"If Simon walks in the middle of us," said Ralph, "then we could talk over his head."
The three of them fell into step. This meant that every now and then Simon had to do
a double shuffle to catch up with the others. Presently Ralph stopped and turned back to
Piggy.
"Look."
Jack and Simon pretended to notice nothing. They walked on.
"You can't come."
Piggy's glasses were misted again--this time with humiliation.
"You told 'em. After what I said."
His face flushed, his mouth trembled.
"After I said I didn't want--"
"What on earth are you talking about?"
"About being called Piggy. I said I didn't care as long as they didn't call me Piggy; an' I
said not to tell and then you went an' said straight out--"
Stillness descended on them. Ralph, looking with more understanding at Piggy, saw
that he was hurt and crushed. He hovered between the two courses of apology or further
insult.
"Better Piggy than Fatty," he said at last, with the directness of genuine leadership,
"and anyway, I'm sorry if you feel like that. Now go back, Piggy, and take names. That's your
job. So long."
He turned and raced after the other two. Piggy stood and the rose of indignation faded
slowly from his cheeks. He went back to the platform.The three boys walked briskly on the sand. The tide was low and there was a strip of
weed-strewn beach that was almost as firm as a road. A kind of glamour was spread over them
and the scene and they were conscious of the glamour and made happy by it. They turned to
each other, laughing excitedly, talking, not listening. The air was bright. Ralph, faced by the
task of translating all this into an explanation, stood on his head and fell over. When they had
done laughing, Simon stroked Ralph's arm shyly; and they had to laugh again.
"Come on," said Jack presently, "we're explorers."
"We'll go to the end of the island," said Ralph, "and look round the corner."
"If it is an island--"
Now, toward the end of the afternoon, the mirages were settling a little. They found
the end of the island, quite distinct, and not magicked out of shape or sense. There was a
jumble of the usual squareness, with one great block sitting out in the lagoon. Sea birds were
nesting there.
"Like icing," said Ralph, "on a pink cake."
"We shan't see round this corner," said Jack, "because there isn't one. Only a slow
curve--and you can see, the rocks get worse--"
Ralph shaded his eyes and followed the jagged outline of the crags up toward the
mountain. This part of the beach was nearer the mountain than any other that they had seen.
"We'll try climbing the mountain from here," he said. "I should think this is the easiest
way. There's less of that jungly stuff; and more pink rock. Come on."
The three boys began to scramble up. Some unknown force had wrenched and
shattered these cubes so that they lay askew, often piled diminishingly on each other. The
most usual feature of the rock was a pink cliff surmounted by a skewed block; and that again
surmounted, and that again, till the pinkness became a stack of balanced rock projecting
through the looped fantasy of the forest creepers. Where the pink cliffs rose out of the ground
there were often narrow tracks winding upwards. They could edge along them, deep in the
plant world, their faces to the rock.
"What made this track?"
Jack paused, wiping the sweat from his face. Ralph stood by him, breathless.
"Men?"
Jack shook his head.
"Animals."
Ralph peered into the darkness under the trees. The forest minutely vibrated.
"Come on."
The difficulty was not the steep ascent round the shoulders of rock, but the occasional
plunges through the undergrowth to get to the next path. Here the roots and stems ofcreepers were in such tangles that the boys had to thread through them like pliant needles.
Their only guide, apart from the brown ground and occasional flashes of light through the
foliage, was the tendency of slope: whether this hole, laced as it was with the cables of creeper,
stood higher than that.
Somehow, they moved up.
Immured in these tangles, at perhaps their most difficult moment, Ralph turned with
shining eyes to the others.
"Wacco."
"Wizard."
"Smashing."
The cause of their pleasure was not obvious. All three were hot, dirty and exhausted.
Ralph was badly scratched. The creepers were as thick as their thighs and left little but tunnels
for further penetration. Ralph shouted experimentally and they listened to the muted echoes.
"This is real exploring," said Jack. "I bet nobody's been here before."
"We ought to draw a map," said Ralph, "only we haven't any paper."
"We could make scratches on bark," said Simon, "and rub black stuff in."
Again came the solemn communion of shining eyes in the gloom.
"Wacco."
"Wizard."
There was no place for standing on one's head. This time Ralph expressed the intensity
of his emotion by pretending to knock Simon down; and soon they were a happy, heaving pile
in the under-dusk.
When they had fallen apart Ralph spoke first.
"Got to get on."
The pink granite of the next cliff was further back from the creepers and trees so that
they could trot up the path. This again led into more open forest so that they had a glimpse of
the spread sea. With openness came the sun; it dried the sweat that had soaked their clothes
in the dark, damp heat. At last the way to the top looked like a scramble over pink rock, with
no more plunging through darkness. The boys chose their way through defiles and over heaps
of sharp stone.
"Look! Look!"
High over this end of the island, the shattered rocks lifted up their stacks and
chimneys. This one, against which Jack leaned, moved with a grating sound when they pushed.
"Come on--"
But not "Come on" to the top. The assault on the summit must wait while the three
boys accepted this challenge. The rock was as large as a small motor car."Heave!"
Sway back and forth, catch the rhythm.
"Heave!"
Increase the swing of the pendulum, increase, increase, come up and bear against that
point of furthest balance-- increase--increase--
"Heave!"
The great rock loitered, poised on one toe, decided not to return, moved through the
air, fell, struck, turned over, leapt droning through the air and smashed a deep hole in the
canopy of the forest. Echoes and birds flew, white and pink dust floated, the forest further
down shook as with the passage of an enraged monster: and then the island was still.
"Wacco!"
"Like a bomb!"
"Whee-aa-oo!"
Not for five minutes could they drag themselves away from this triumph. But they left
at last.
The way to the top was easy after that. As they reached the last stretch Ralph stopped.
"Golly!"
They were on the lip of a circular hollow in the side of the mountain. This was filled
with a blue flower, a rock plant of some sort, and the overflow hung down the vent and spilled
lavishly among the canopy of the forest. The air was thick with butterflies, lifting, fluttering,
settling.
Beyond the hollow was the square top of the mountain and soon they were standing on
it.
They had guessed before that this was an island: clambering among the pink rocks,
with the sea on either side, and the crystal heights of air, they had known by some instinct
that the sea lay on every side. But there seemed something more fitting in leaving the last
word till they stood on the top, and could see a circular horizon of water.
Ralph turned to the others.
"This belongs to us."
It was roughly boat-shaped: humped near this end with behind them the jumbled
descent to the shore. On either side rocks, cliffs, treetops and a steep slope: forward there, the
length of the boat, a tamer descent, tree-clad, with hints of pink: and then the jungly flat of
the island, dense green, but drawn at the end to a pink tail. There, where the island petered
out in water, was another island; a rock, almost detached, standing like a fort, facing them
across the green with one bold, pink bastion.The boys surveyed all this, then looked out to sea. They were high up and the
afternoon had advanced; the view was not robbed of sharpness by mirage.
"That's a reef. A coral reef. I've seen pictures like that."
The reef enclosed more than one side of the island, lying perhaps a mile out and parallel
to what they now thought of as their beach. The coral was scribbled in the sea as though a
giant had bent down to reproduce the shape of the island in a flowing chalk line but tired
before he had finished. Inside was peacock water, rocks and weeds showing as in an aquarium;
outside was the dark blue of the sea. The tide was running so that long streaks of foam tailed
away from the reef and for a moment they felt that the boat was moving steadily astern.
Jack pointed down.
"That's where we landed."
Beyond falls and cliffs there was a gash visible in the trees; there were the splintered
trunks and then the drag, leaving only a fringe of palm between the scar and the sea. There,
too, jutting into the lagoon, was the platform, with insect-like figures moving near it.
Ralph sketched a twining line from the bald spot on which they stood down a slope, a
gully, through flowers, round and down to the rock where the scar started.
"That's the quickest way back."
Eyes shining, mouths open, triumphant, they savored the right of domination. They
were lifted up: were friends.
"There's no village smoke, and no boats," said Ralph wisely. "We'll make sure later; but
I think it's uninhabited."
"We'll get food," cried Jack. "Hunt. Catch things. until they fetch us."
Simon looked at them both, saying nothing but nodding till his black hair flopped
backwards and forwards: his face was glowing.
Ralph looked down the other way where there was no reef.
"Steeper," said Jack.
Ralph made a cupping gesture.
"That bit of forest down there . . . the mountain holds it up."
Every point of the mountain held up trees--flowers and trees. Now the forest stirred,
roared, flailed. The nearer acres of rock flowers fluttered and for half a minute the breeze blew
cool on their faces.
Ralph spread his arms.
"All ours."
They laughed and tumbled and shouted on the mountain.
"I'm hungry."
When Simon mentioned his hunger the others became aware of theirs."Come on," said Ralph. "We've found out what we wanted to know."
They scrambled down a rock slope, dropped among flowers and made their way under
the trees. Here they paused and examined the bushes round them curiously.
Simon spoke first.
"Like candles. Candle bushes. Candle buds."
The bushes were dark evergreen and aromatic and the many buds were waxen green
and folded up against the light. Jack slashed at one with his knife and the scent spilled over
them.
"Candle buds."
"You couldn't light them," said Ralph. "They just look like candles."
"Green candles," said Jack contemptuously. "We can't eat them. Come on."
They were in the beginnings of the thick forest, plonking with weary feet on a track,
when they heard the noises--squeakings--and the hard strike of hoofs on a path. As they
pushed forward the squeaking increased till it became a frenzy. They found a piglet caught in a
curtain of creepers, throwing itself at the elastic traces in all the madness of extreme terror. Its
voice was thin, needle-sharp and insistent; The three boys rushed forward and Jack drew his
knife again with a flourish. He raised his arm in the air. There came a pause, a hiatus, the pig
continued to scream and the creepers to jerk, and the blade continued to flash at the end of a
bony arm. The pause was only long enough for them to understand what an enormity the
downward stroke would be. Then the piglet tore loose from the creepers and scurried into the
undergrowth. They were left looking at each other and the place of terror. Jack's face was
white under the freckles. He noticed that he still held the knife aloft and brought his arm
down replacing the blade in the sheath. Then they all three laughed ashamedly and began to
climb back to the track.
"I was choosing a place," said Jack. "I was just waiting for a moment to decide where to
stab him."
"You should stick a pig," said Ralph fiercely. "They always talk about sticking a pig."
"You cut a pig's throat to let the blood out," said Jack, "otherwise you can't eat the
meat."
"Why didn't you--?"
They knew very well why he hadn't: because of the enormity of the knife descending
and cutting into living flesh; because of the unbearable blood.
"I was going to," said Jack. He was ahead of them, and they could not see his face. "I
was choosing a place. Next time--!"
He snatched his knife out of the sheath and slammed it into a tree trunk. Next time
there would be no mercy. He looked round fiercely, daring them to contradict. Then theybroke out into the sunlight and for a while they were busy finding and devouring food as they
moved down the scar toward the platform and the meeting.
CHAPTER TWO
Fire on the Mountain
By the time Ralph finished blowing the conch the platform was crowded. There were
differences between this meeting and the one held in the morning. The afternoon sun slanted
in from the other side of the platform and most of the children, feeling too late the smart of
sunburn, had put their clothes on. The choir, less of a group, had discarded their cloaks.
Ralph sat on a fallen trunk, his left side to the sun. On his right were most of the choir;
on his left the larger boys who had not known each other before the evacuation; before him
small children squatted in the grass.
Silence now. Ralph lifted the cream and pink shell to his knees and a sudden breeze
scattered light over the platform. He was uncertain whether to stand up or remain sitting. He
looked sideways to his left, toward the bathing pool. Piggy was sitting near but giving no help.
Ralph cleared his throat.
"Well then."
All at once he found he could talk fluently and explain what he had to say. He passed a
hand through his fair hair and spoke.
"We're on an island. We've been on the mountain top and seen water all round. We
saw no houses, no smoke, no footprints, no boats, no people. We're on an uninhabited island
with no other people on it."
Jack broke in.
"All the same you need an army--for hunting. Hunting pigs--"
"Yes. There are pigs on the island."
All three of them tried to convey the sense of the pink live thing struggling in the
creepers.
"We saw--"
"Squealing--"
"It broke away--"
"Before I could kill it--but--next time!"
Jack slammed his knife into a trunk and looked round challengingly.
The meeting settled down again.
"So you see," said Ralph, "We need hunters to get us meat. And another thing."He lifted the shell on his knees and looked round the sun-slashed faces.
"There aren't any grownups. We shall have to look after ourselves."
The meeting hummed and was silent.
"And another thing. We can't have everybody talking at once. We'll have to have
'Hands up' like at school."
He held the conch before his face and glanced round the mouth.
"Then I'll give him the conch."
"Conch?"
"That's what this shell's called. I'll give the conch to the next person to speak. He can
hold it when he's speaking."
"But--"
"Look--"
"And he won't be interrupted: Except by me."
Jack was on his feet.
"We'll have rules!" he cried excitedly. "Lots of rules! Then when anyone breaks 'em--"
"Whee--oh!"
"Wacco!"
"Bong!"
"Doink!"
Ralph felt the conch lifted from his lap. Then Piggy was standing cradling the great
cream shell and the shouting died down. Jack, left on his feet, looked uncertainly at Ralph who
smiled and patted the log. Jack sat down. Piggy took off his glasses and blinked at the assembly
while he wiped them on his shirt.
"You're hindering Ralph. You're not letting him get to the most important thing."
He paused effectively.
"Who knows we're here? Eh?"
"They knew at the airport."
"The man with a trumpet-thing--"
"My dad."
Piggy put on his glasses.
"Nobody knows where we are," said Piggy. He was paler than before and breathless.
"Perhaps they knew where we was going to; and perhaps not. But they don't know where we
are 'cos we never got there." He gaped at them for a moment, then swayed and sat down.
Ralph took the conch from his hands."That's what I was going to say," he went on, "when you all, all. . . ." He gazed at their
intent faces. "The plane was shot down in flames. Nobody knows where we are. We may be
here a long time."
The silence was so complete that they could hear the unevenness of Piggy's breathing.
The sun slanted in and lay golden over half the platform. The breezes that on the lagoon had
chased their tails like kittens were finding their way across the platform and into the forest.
Ralph pushed back the tangle of fair hair that hung on his forehead.
"So we may be here a long time."
Nobody said anything. He grinned suddenly.
"But this is a good island. We--Jack, Simon and me-- we climbed the mountain. It's
wizard. There's food and drink, and--"
"Rocks--"
"Blue flowers--"
Piggy, partly recovered, pointed to the conch in Ralph's hands, and Jack and Simon fell
silent. Ralph went on.
"While we're waiting we can have a good time on this island."
He gesticulated widely.
"It's like in a book."
At once there was a clamor.
"Treasure Island--"
"Swallows and Amazons--"
"Coral Island--"
Ralph waved the conch.
"This is our island. It's a good island. Until the grownups come to fetch us we'll have
fun."
Jack held out his hand for the conch.
"There's pigs," he said. "There's food; and bathing water in that little stream along
there--and everything. Didn't anyone find anything else?"
He handed the conch back to Ralph and sat down. Apparently no one had found
anything.
The older boys first noticed the child when he resisted. There was a group of little boys
urging him forward and he did not want to go. He was a shrimp of a boy, about six years old,
and one side of his face was blotted out by a mulberry-colored birthmark. He stood now,
warped out of the perpendicular by the fierce light of publicity, and he bored into the coarse
grass with one toe. He was muttering and about to cry.
The other little boys, whispering but serious, pushed him toward Ralph."All right," said Ralph, "come on then."
The small boy looked round in panic.
"Speak up!"
The small boy held out his hands for the conch and the assembly shouted with
laughter; at once he snatched back his hands and started to cry.
"Let him have the conch!" shouted Piggy. "Let him have it!"
At last Ralph induced him to hold the shell but by then the blow of laughter had taken
away the child's voice. Piggy knelt by him, one hand on the great shell, listening and
interpreting to the assembly.
"He wants to know what you're going to do about the snake-thing."
Ralph laughed, and the other boys laughed with him. The small boy twisted further
into himself.
"Tell us about the snake-thing."
"Now he says it was a beastie."
"Beastie?''
"A snake-thing. Ever so big. He saw it."
"Where?"
"In the woods."
Either the wandering breezes or perhaps the decline of the sun allowed a little coolness
to lie under the trees. The boys felt it and stirred restlessly.
"You couldn't have a beastie, a snake-thing, on an island this size," Ralph explained
kindly. "You only get them in big countries, like Africa, or India."
Murmur; and the grave nodding of heads.
"He says the beastie came in the dark."
"Then he couldn't see it!"
Laughter and cheers.
"Did you hear that? Says he saw the thing in the dark--"
"He still says he saw the beastie. It came and went away again an' came back and
wanted to eat him--"
"He was dreaming."
Laughing, Ralph looked for confirmation round the ring of faces. The older boys
agreed; but here and there among the little ones was the doubt that required more than
rational assurance.
"He must have had a nightmare. Stumbling about among all those creepers."
More grave nodding; they knew about nightmares. "He says he saw the beastie, the
snake-thing, and will it come back tonight?""But there isn't a beastie!"
"He says in the morning it turned into them things like ropes in the trees and hung in
the branches. He says will it come back tonight?"
"But there isn't a beastie!"
There was no laughter at all now and more grave watching. Ralph pushed both hands
through his hair and looked at the little boy in mixed amusement and exasperation.
Jack seized the conch.
"Ralph's right of course. There isn't a snake-thing. But if there was a snake we'd hunt it
and kill it. We're going to hunt pigs to get meat for everybody. And we'll look for the snake
too--"
"But there isn't a snake!"
"We'll make sure when we go hunting."
Ralph was annoyed and, for the moment, defeated. He felt himself facing something
ungraspable. The eyes that looked so intently at him were without humor.
"But there isn't a beast!"
Something he had not known was there rose in him and compelled him to make the
point, loudly and again.
"But I tell you there isn't a beast!"
The assembly was silent.
Ralph lifted the conch again and his good humor came back as he thought of what he
had to say next.
"Now we come to the most important thing. I've been thinking. I was thinking while
we were climbing the mountain." He flashed a conspiratorial grin at the other two. "And on
the beach just now. This is what I thought. We want to have fun. And we want to be rescued."
The passionate noise of agreement from the assembly hit him like a wave and he lost
his thread. He thought again.
"We want to be rescued; and of course we shall be rescued."
Voices babbled. The simple statement, unbacked by any proof but the weight of
Ralph's new authority, brought light and happiness. He had to wave the conch before he could
make them hear him.
"My father's in the Navy. He said there aren't any unknown islands left. He says the
Queen has a big room full of maps and all the islands in the world are drawn there. So the
Queen's got a picture of this island."
Again came the sounds of cheerfulness and better heart.
"And sooner or later a ship will put in here. It might even be Daddy's ship. So you see,
sooner or later, we shall be rescued."He paused, with the point made. The assembly was lifted toward safety by his words.
They liked and now respected him. Spontaneously they began to clap and presently the
platform was loud with applause. Ralph flushed, looking sideways at Piggy's open admiration,
and then the other way at Jack who was smirking and showing that he too knew how to clap.
Ralph waved the conch.
"Shut up! Wait! Listen!"
He went on in the silence, borne on his triumph.
"There's another thing. We can help them to find us. If a ship comes near the island
they may not notice us. So we must make smoke on top of the mountain. We must make a
fire."
"A fire! Make a fire!"
At once half the boys were on their feet. Jack clamored among them, the conch
forgotten.
"Come on! Follow me!"
The space under the palm trees was full of noise and movement. Ralph was on his feet
too, shouting for quiet, but no one heard him. All at once the crowd swayed toward the island
and was gone--following Jack. Even the tiny children went and did their best among the leaves
and broken branches. Ralph was left, holding the conch, with no one but Piggy.
Piggy's breathing was quite restored.
"Like kids!" he said scornfully. "Acting like a crowd of kids!"
Ralph looked at him doubtfully and laid the conch on the tree trunk.
"I bet it's gone tea-time," said Piggy. "What do they think they're going to do on that
mountain?"
He caressed the shell respectfully, then stopped and looked up.
"Ralph! Hey! Where you going?"
Ralph was already clambering over the first smashed swathes of the scar. A long way
ahead of him was crashing and laughter.
Piggy watched him in disgust.
"Like a crowd of kids--"
He sighed, bent, and laced up his shoes. The noise of the errant assembly faded up the
mountain. Then, with the martyred expression of a parent who has to keep up with the
senseless ebullience of the children, he picked up the conch, turned toward the forest, and
began to pick his way over the tumbled scar.
Below the other side of the mountain top was a platform of forest. Once more Ralph
found himself making the cupping gesture."Down there we could get as much wood as we want."
Jack nodded and pulled at his underlip. Starting perhaps a hundred feet below them on
the steeper side of the mountain, the patch might have been designed expressly for fuel. Trees,
forced by the damp heat, found too little soil for full growth, fell early and decayed: creepers
cradled them, and new saplings searched a way up.
Jack turned to the choir, who stood ready. Their black caps of maintenance were slid
over one ear like berets.
"We'll build a pile. Come on."
They found the likeliest path down and began tugging at the dead wood. And the small
boys who had reached the top came sliding too till everyone but Piggy was busy. Most of the
wood was so rotten that when they pulled, it broke up into a shower of fragments and
woodlice and decay; but some trunks came out in one piece. The twins, Sam 'n Eric, were the
first to get a likely log but they could do nothing till Ralph, Jack, Simon, Roger and Maurice
found room for a hand-hold. Then they inched the grotesque dead thing up the rock and
toppled it over on top. Each party of boys added a quota, less or more, and the pile grew. At
the return Ralph found himself alone on a limb with Jack and they grinned at each other,
sharing this burden. Once more, amid the breeze, the shouting, the slanting sunlight on the
high mountain, was shed that glamour, that strange invisible light of friendship, adventure, and
content.
"Almost too heavy."
Jack grinned back.
"Not for the two of us."
Together, joined in an effort by the burden, they staggered up the last steep Of the
mountain. Together, they chanted One! Two! Three! and crashed the log on to the great pile.
Then they stepped back, laughing with triumphant pleasure, so that immediately Ralph had to
stand on his head. Below them, boys were still laboring, though some of the small ones had
lost interest and were searching this new forest for fruit. Now the twins, with unsuspected
intelligence, came up the mountain with armfuls of dried leaves and dumped them against the
pile. One by one, as they sensed that the pile was complete, the boys stopped going back for
more and stood, with the pink, shattered top of the mountain around them. Breath came
evenly by now, and sweat dried.
Ralph and Jack looked at each other while society paused about them. The shameful
knowledge grew in them and they did not know how to begin confession.
Ralph spoke first, crimson in the face.
"Will you?"
He cleared his throat and went on."Will you light the fire?"
Now the absurd situation was open, Jack blushed too. He began to mutter vaguely.
"You rub two sticks. You rub--"
He glanced at Ralph, who blurted out the last confession of incompetence.
"Has anyone got any matches?"
"You make a bow and spin the arrow," said Roger. He rubbed his hands in mime. "Psss.
Psss."
A little air was moving over the mountain. Piggy came with it, in shorts and shirt,
laboring cautiously out of the forest with the evening sunlight gleaming from his glasses. He
held the conch under his arm.
Ralph shouted at him.
"Piggy! Have you got any matches?"
The other boys took up the cry till the mountain rang. Piggy shook his head and came
to the pile.
"My! You've made a big heap, haven't you?"
Jack pointed suddenly.
"His specs--use them as burning glasses!"
Piggy was surrounded before he could back away.
"Here--let me go!" His voice rose to a shriek of terror as Jack snatched the glasses off
his face. "Mind out! Give 'em back! I can hardly see! You'll break the conch!"
Ralph elbowed him to ne side and knelt by the pile.
"Stand out of the light."
There was pushing and pulling and officious cries. Ralph moved the lenses back and
forth, this way and that, till a glossy white image of the declining sun lay on a piece of rotten
wood. Almost at once a thin trickle of smoke rose up and made him cough. Jack knelt too and
blew gently, so that the smoke drifted away, thickening, and a tiny flame appeared. The flame,
nearly invisible at first in that bright sunlight, enveloped a small twig, grew, was enriched with
color and reached up to a branch which exploded with a sharp crack. The flame flapped higher
and the boys broke into a cheer.
"My specs!" howled Piggy. "Give me my specs!"
Ralph stood away from the pile and put the glasses into Piggy's groping hands. His
voice subsided to a mutter.
"Jus' blurs, that's all. Hardly see my hand--"
The boys were dancing. The pile was so rotten, and now so tinder-dry, that whole limbs
yielded passionately to the yellow flames that poured upwards and shook a great beard offlame twenty feet in the air. For yards round the fire the heat was like a blow, and the breeze
was a river of sparks. Trunks crumbled to white dust.
Ralph shouted.
"More wood! All of you get more wood!"
Life became a race with the fire and the boys scattered through the upper forest. To
keep a clean flag of flame flying on the mountain was the immediate end and no one looked
further. Even the smallest boys, unless fruit claimed them, brought little pieces of wood and
threw them in. The air moved a little faster and became a light wind, so that leeward and
windward side were clearly differentiated. On one side the air was cool, but on the other the
fire thrust out a savage arm of heat that crinkled hair on the instant. Boys who felt the evening
wind on their damp faces paused to enjoy the freshness of it and then found they were
exhausted. They flung themselves down in the shadows that lay among the shattered rocks.
The beard of flame diminished quickly; then the pile fell inwards with a soft, cindery sound,
and sent a great tree of sparks upwards that leaned away and drifted downwind. The boys lay,
panting like dogs.
Ralph raised his head off his forearms.
"That was no good."
Roger spat efficiently into the hot dust.
"What d'you mean?"
"There wasn't any smoke. Only flame."
Piggy had settled himself in a space between two rocks, and sat with the conch on his
knees.
"We haven't made a fire," he said, "what's any use. We couldn't keep a fire like that
going, not if we tried."
"A fat lot you tried," said Jack contemptuously. "You just sat."
"We used his specs," said Simon, smearing a black cheek with his forearm. "He helped
that way."
"I got the conch," said Piggy indignantly. "You let me speak!"
"The conch doesn't count on top of the mountain," said Jack, "so you shut up."
"I got the conch in my hand."
"Put on green branches," said Maurice. "That's the best way to make smoke."
"I got the conch--"
Jack turned fiercely.
"You shut up!"
Piggy wilted. Ralph took the conch from him and looked round the circle of boys."We've got to have special people for looking after the fire. Any day there may be a
ship out there"--he waved his arm at the taut wire of the horizon--"and if we have a signal
going they'll come and take us off. And another thing. We ought to have more rules. Where
the conch is, that's a meeting. The same up here as down there."
They assented. Piggy opened his mouth to speak, caught Jack's eye and shut it again.
Jack held out his hands for the conch and stood up, holding the delicate thing carefully in his
sooty hands.
"I agree with Ralph. We've got to have rules and obey them. After all, we're not
savages. We're English, and the English are best at everything. So we've got to do the right
things."
He turned to Ralph.
"Ralph, I'll split up the choir--my hunters, that is--into groups, and we'll be responsible
for keeping the fire going--"
This generosity brought a spatter of applause from the boys, so that Jack grinned at
them, then waved the conch for silence.
"We'll let the fire burn out now. Who would see smoke at night-time, anyway? And we
can start the fire again whenever we like. Altos, you can keep the fire going this week, and
trebles the next--"
The assembly assented gravely.
"And we'll be responsible for keeping a lookout too. If we see a ship out there"--they
followed the direction of his bony arm with their eyes--"we'll put green branches on. Then
there'll be more smoke."
They gazed intently at the dense blue of the horizon, as if a little silhouette might
appear there at any moment.
The sun in the west was a drop of burning gold that slid nearer and nearer the sill of the
world. All at once they were aware of the evening as the end of light and warmth.
Roger took the conch and looked round at them gloomily.
"I've been watching the sea. There hasn't been the trace of a ship. Perhaps we'll never
be rescued."
A murmur rose and swept away. Ralph took back the conch.
"I said before we'll be rescued sometime. We've just got to wait, that's all."
Daring, indignant, Piggy took the conch.
"That's what I said! I said about our meetings and things and then you said shut up--"
His voice lifted into the whine of virtuous recrimination. They stirred and began to
shout him down."You said you wanted a small fire and you been and built a pile like a hayrick. If I say
anything," cried Piggy, with bitter realism, "you say shut up; but if Jack or Maurice or Simon--"
He paused in the tumult, standing, looking beyond them and down the unfriendly side
of the mountain to the great patch where they had found dead wood. Then he laughed so
strangely that they were hushed, looking at the flash of his spectacles in astonishment. They
followed his gaze to find the sour joke.
"You got your small fire all right."
Smoke was rising here and there among the creepers that festooned the dead or dying
trees. As they watched, a flash of fire appeared at the root of one wisp, and then the smoke
thickened. Small flames stirred at the trunk of a tree and crawled away through leaves and
brushwood, dividing and increasing. One patch touched a tree trunk and scrambled up like a
bright squirrel. The smoke increased, sifted, rolled outwards. The squirrel leapt on the wings
of the wind and clung to another standing tree, eating downwards. Beneath the dark canopy of
leaves and smoke the fire laid hold on the forest and began to gnaw. Acres of black and yellow
smoke rolled steadily toward the sea. At the sight of the flames and the irresistible course of
the fire, the boys broke into shrill, excited cheering. The flames, as though they were a kind of
wild life, crept as a jaguar creeps on its belly toward a line of birch-like saplings that fledged an
outcrop of the pink rock. They flapped at the first of the trees, and the branches grew a brief
foliage of fire. The heart of flame leapt nimbly across the gap between the trees and then went
swinging and flaring along the whole row of them. Beneath the capering boys a quarter of a
mile square of forest was savage with smoke and flame. The separate noises of the fire merged
into a drum-roll that seemed to shake the mountain.
"You got your small fire all right."
Startled, Ralph realized that the boys were falling still and silent, feeling the beginnings
of awe at the power set free below them. The knowledge and the awe made him savage.
"Oh, shut up!"
"I got the conch," said Piggy, in a hurt voice. "I got a right to speak."
They looked at him with eyes that lacked interest in what they saw, and cocked ears at
the drum-roll of the fire. Piggy glanced nervously into hell and cradled the conch.
"We got to let that burn out now. And that was our firewood."
He licked his lips.
"There ain't nothing we can do. We ought to be more careful. I'm scared--"
Jack dragged his eyes away from the fire.
"You're always scared. Yah--Fatty!"
"I got the conch," said Piggy bleakly. He turned to Ralph. "I got the conch, ain't I
Ralph?"Unwillingly Ralph turned away from the splendid, awful sight.
"What's that?"
"The conch. I got a right to speak."
The twins giggled together.
"We wanted smoke--"
"Now look--!"
A pall stretched for miles away from the island. All the boys except Piggy started to
giggle; presently they were shrieking with laughter.
Piggy lost his temper.
"I got the conch! Just you listen! The first thing we ought to have made was shelters
down there by the beach. It wasn't half cold down there in the night. But the first time Ralph
says 'fire' you goes howling and screaming up this here mountain. Like a pack of kids!"
By now they were listening to the tirade.
"How can you expect to be rescued if you don't put first things first and act proper?"
He took off his glasses and made as if to put down the conch; but the sudden motion
toward it of most of the older boys changed his mind. He tucked the shell under his arm, and
crouched back on a rock.
"Then when you get here you build a bonfire that isn't no use. Now you been and set
the whole island on fire. Won't we look funny if the whole island burns up? Cooked fruit,
that's what we'll have to eat, and roast pork. And that's nothing to laugh at! You said Ralph
was chief and you don't give him time to think. Then when he says something you rush off,
like, like--"
He paused for breath, and the fire growled at them.
"And that's not all. Them kids. The little 'uns. Who took any notice of 'em? Who
knows how many we got?"
Ralph took a sudden step forward.
"I told you to. I told you to get a list of names!"
"How could I," cried Piggy indignantly, "all by myself? They waited for two minutes,
then they fell in the sea; they went into the forest; they just scattered everywhere. How was I
to know which was which?"
Ralph licked pale lips.
"Then you don't know how many of us there ought to be?"
"How could I with them little 'uns running round like insects? Then when you three
came back, as soon as you said make a fire, they all ran away, and I never had a chance--"
"That's enough!" said Ralph sharply, and snatched back the conch. "If you didn't you
didn't.""--then you come up here an' pinch my specs--"
Jack turned on him.
"You shut up!"
"--and them little 'uns was wandering about down there where the fire is. How d'you
know they aren't still there?"
Piggy stood up and pointed to the smoke and flames. A murmur rose among the boys
and died away. Something strange was happening to Piggy, for he was gasping for breath.
"That little 'un--" gasped Piggy--"him with the mark on his face, I don't see him.
Where is he now?"
The crowd was as silent as death.
"Him that talked about the snakes. He was down there--"
A tree exploded in the fire like a bomb. Tall swathes of creepers rose for a moment
into view, agonized, and went down again. The little boys screamed at them.
"Snakes! Snakes! Look at the snakes!"
In the west, and unheeded, the sun lay only an inch or two above the sea. Their faces
were lit redly from beneath. Piggy fell against a rock and clutched it with both hands.
"That little 'un that had a mark on his face--where is--he now? I tell you I don't see
him."
The boys looked at each other fearfully, unbelieving.
"--where is he now?"
Ralph muttered the reply as if in shame. "Perhaps he went back to the, the--" Beneath
them, on the unfriendly side of the mountain, the drum-roll continued.
CHAPTER THREE
Huts on the Beach
Jack was bent double. He was down like a sprinter, his nose only a few inches from the
humid earth. The tree trunks and the creepers that festooned them lost themlves in a green
dusk thirty feet above him, and all about was the undergrowth. There was only the faintest
indication of a trail here; a cracked twig and what might be the impression of one side of a
hoof. He lowered his chin and stared at the traces as though he would force them to speak to
him. Then dog-like, uncomfortably on all fours yet unheeding his discomfort, he stole forward
five yards and stopped. Here was loop of creeper with a tendril pendant from a node. The
tendril was polished on the underside; pigs, passing through the loop, brushed it with their
bristly hide.Jack crouched with his face a few inches away from this clue, then stared forward into
the semi-darkness of the undergrowth. His sandy hair, considerably longer than it had been
when they dropped in, was lighter now; and his bare back was a mass of dark freckles and
peeling sunburn. A sharpened stick about five feet long trailed from his right hand, and except
for a pair of tattered shorts held up by his knife-belt he was naked. He closed his eyes, raised
his head and breathed in gently with flared nostrils, assessing the current of warm air for
information. The forest and he were very still.
At length he let out his breath in a long sigh and opened his eyes. They were bright
blue, eyes that in this frustration seemed bolting and nearly mad. He passed his tongue across
dry lips and scanned the uncommunicative forest. Then again he stole forward and cast this
way and that over the ground.
The silence of the forest was more oppressive than the heat, and at this hour of the day
there was not even the whine of insects. Only when Jack himself roused a gaudy bird from a
primitive nest of sticks was the silence shattered and echoes set ringing by a harsh cry that
seemed to come out of the abyss of ages. Jack himself shrank at this cry with a hiss of indrawn
breath, and for a minute became less a hunter than a furtive thing, ape-like among the tangle
of trees. Then the trail, the frustration, claimed him again and he searched the ground avidly.
By the trunk of a vast tree that grew pale flowers on its grey bark he checked, closed his eyes,
and once more drew in the warm air; and this time his breath came short, there was even a
passing pallor in his face, and then the surge of blood again. He passed like a shadow under the
darkness of the tree and crouched, looking down at the trodden ground at his feet.
The droppings were warm. They lay piled among turned earth. They were olive green,
smooth, and they steamed a little. Jack lifted his head and stared at the inscrutable masses of
creeper that lay across the trail. Then he raised his spear and sneaked forward. Beyond the
creeper, the trail joined a pig-run that was wide enough and trodden enough to be a path. The
ground was hardened by an accustomed tread and as Jack rose to his full height he heard
something moving on it. He swung back his right arm and hurled the spear with all his
strength. From the pig-run came the quick, hard patter of hoofs, a castanet sound, seductive,
maddening--the promise of meat. He rushed out of the undergrowth and snatched up his
spear. The pattering of pig's trotters died away in the distance.
Jack stood there, streaming with sweat, streaked with brown earth, stained by all the
vicissitudes of a day's hunting. Swearing, he turned off the trail and pushed his way through
until the forest opened a little and instead of bald trunks supporting a dark roof there were
light grey trunks and crowns of feathery palm. Beyond these was the glitter of the sea and he
could hear voices. Ralph was standing by a contraption of palm trunks and leaves, a rudeshelter that faced the lagoon and seemed very near to falling down. He did not notice when
Jack spoke.
"Got any water?"
Ralph looked up, frowning, from the complication of leaves. He did not notice Jack
even when he saw him.
"I said have you got any water? I'm thirsty." Ralph withdrew his attention from the
shelter and realized Jack with a start.
"Oh, hullo. Water? There by the tree. Ought to be some left."
Jack took up a coconut shell that brimmed with fresh water from among a group that
was arranged in the shade, and drank. The water splashed over his chin and neck and chest.
He breathed noisily when he had finished.
"Needed that."
Simon spoke from inside the shelter.
"Up a bit."
Ralph turned to the shelter and lifted a branch with a whole tiling of leaves.
The leaves came apart and fluttered down. Simon's contrite face appeared in the hole.
"Sorry."
Ralph surveyed the wreck with distaste.
"Never get it done."
He flung himself down at Jack's feet. Simon remained, looking out of the hole in the
shelter. Once down, Ralph explained.
"Been working for days now. And look!"
Two shelters were in position, but shaky. This one was a ruin.
"And they keep running off. You remember the meeting? How everyone was going to
work hard until the shelters were finished?"
"Except me and my hunters--"
"Except the hunters. Well, the littluns are--"
He gesticulated, sought for a word.
"They're hopeless. The older ones aren't much better. D'you see? All day I've been
working with Simon. No one else. They're off bathing, or eating, or playing."
Simon poked his head out carefully.
"You're chief. You tell 'em off."
Ralph lay flat and looked up at the palm trees and the sky.
"Meetings. Don't we love meetings? Every day. Twice a day. We talk." He got on one
elbow. "I bet if I blew the conch this minute, they'd come running. Then we'd be, you know,very solemn, and someone would say we ought to build a jet, or a submarine, or a TV set.
When the meeting was over they'd work for five minutes, then wander off or go hunting."
Jack flushed.
"We want meat."
"Well, we haven't got any yet. And we want shelters. Besides, the rest of your hunters
came back hours ago. They've been swimming."
"I went on," said Jack. "I let them go. I had to go on. I--"
He tried to convey the compulsion to track down and kill that was swallowing him up.
"I went on. I thought, by myself--"
The madness came into his eyes again.
"I thought I might--kill."
"But you didn't."
"I thought I might."
Some hidden passion vibrated in Ralph's voice.
"But you haven't yet."
His invitation might have passed as casual, were it not for the undertone.
"You wouldn't care to help with the shelters, I suppose?"
"We want meat--"
"And we don't get it."
Now the antagonism was audible.
"But I shall! Next time! I've got to get a barb on this spear! We wounded a pig and the
spear fell out. If we could only make barbs--"
"We need shelters."
Suddenly Jack shouted in rage.
"Are you accusing--?"
"All I'm saying is we've worked dashed hard. That's all."
They were both red in the face and found looking at each other difficult. Ralph rolled
on his stomach and began to play with the grass.
"If it rains like when we dropped in we'll need shelters all right. And then another
thing. We need shelters because of the--"
He paused for a moment and they both pushed their anger away. Then he went on with
the safe, changed subject.
"You've noticed, haven't you?"
Jack put down his spear and squatted.
"Noticed what?"
"Well. They're frightened."He rolled over and peered into Jack's fierce, dirty face.
"I mean the way things are. They dream. You can hear 'em. Have you been awake at
night?"
Jack shook his head.
"They talk and scream. The littluns. Even some of the others. As if--"
"As if it wasn't a good island."
Astonished at the interruption, they looked up at Simon's serious face.
"As if," said Simon, "the beastie, the beastie or the snake-thing, was real. Remember?"
The two older boys flinched when they heard the shameful syllable. Snakes were not
mentioned now, were not mentionable.
"As if this wasn't a good island," said Ralph slowly. "Yes, that's right."
Jack sat up and stretched out his legs.
"They're batty."
"Crackers. Remember when we went exploring?" They grinned at each other,
remembering the glamour of the first day. Ralph went on.
"So we need shelters as a sort of--"
"Home."
"That's right."
Jack drew up his legs, clasped his knees, and frowned in an effort to attain clarity.
"All the same--in the forest. I mean when you're hunting, not when you're getting fruit,
of course, but when you're on your own--"
He paused for a moment, not sure if Ralph would take him seriously.
"Go on."
"If you're hunting sometimes you catch yourself feeling as if--" He flushed suddenly.
"There's nothing in it of course. Just a feeling. But you can feel as if you're not hunting, but--
being hunted, as if something's behind you all the time in the jungle."
They were silent again: Simon intent, Ralph incredulous and faintly indignant. He sat
up, rubbing one shoulder with a dirty hand.
"Well, I don't know."
Jack leapt to his feet and spoke very quickly.
"That's how you can feel in the forest. Of course there's nothing in it. Only--only--"
He took a few rapid steps toward the beach, then came back.
"Only I know how they feel. See? That's all."
"The best thing we can do is get ourselves rescued."
Jack had to think for a moment before he could remember what rescue was."Rescue? Yes, of course! All the same, I'd like to catch a pig first--" He snatched up his
spear and dashed it into the ground. The opaque, mad look came into his eyes again. Ralph
looked at him critically through his tangle of fair hair.
"So long as your hunters remember the fire--"
"You and your fire!"
The two boys trotted down the beach, and, turning at the water's edge, looked back at
the pink mountain. The trickle of smoke sketched a chalky line up the solid blue of the sky,
wavered high up and faded. Ralph frowned.
"I wonder how far off you could see that."
"Miles."
"We don't make enough smoke."
The bottom part of the trickle, as though conscious of their gaze, thickened to a
creamy blur which crept up the feeble column.
"They've put on green branches," muttered Ralph. "I wonder!" He screwed up his eyes
and swung round to search the horizon.
"Got it!"
Jack shouted so loudly that Ralph jumped.
"What? Where? Is it a ship?"
But Jack was pointing to the high declivities that led down from the mountain to the
flatter part of the island.
"Of course! They'll lie up there--they must, when the sun's too hot--"
Ralph gazed bewildered at his rapt face.
"--they get up high. High up and in the shade, resting during the heat, like cows at
home--"
"I thought you saw a ship!"
"We could steal up on one--paint our faces so they wouldn't see--perhaps surround
them and then--"
Indignation took away Ralph's control.
"I was talking about smoke! Don't you want to be rescued? All you can talk about is
pig, pig, pig!"
"But we want meat!"
"And I work all day with nothing but Simon and you come back and don't even notice
the huts!"
"I was working too--"
"But you like it!" shouted Ralph. "You want to hunt! While I--"They faced each other on the bright beach, astonished at the rub of feeling. Ralph
looked away first, pretending interest in a group of littluns on the sand. From beyond the
platform came the shouting of the hunters in the swimming pool. On the end of the platform,
Piggy was lying flat, looking down into the brilliant water.
"People don't help much."
He wanted to explain how people were never quite what you thought they were.
"Simon. He helps." He pointed at the shelters.
"All the rest rushed off. He's done as much as I have. Only--"
"Simon's always about."
Ralph stared back to the shelters with Jack by his side.
"Do a bit for you," muttered Jack, "before I have a bathe."
"Don't bother."
But when they reached the shelters Simon was not to be seen. Ralph put his head in the
hole, withdrew it, and turned to Jack.
"He's buzzed off."
"Got fed up," said Jack, "and gone for a bathe."
Ralph frowned.
"He's queer. He's funny."
Jack nodded, as much for the sake of agreeing as anything, and by tacit consent they
left the shelter and went toward the bathing pool.
"And then," said Jack, "when I've had a bathe and something to eat, I'll just trek over
to the other side of the mountain and see if I can see any traces. Coming?"
"But the sun's nearly set!"
"I might have time---"
They walked along, two continents of experience and feeling, unable to communicate.
"If I could only get a pig!"
"I'll come back and go on with the shelter."
They looked at each other, baffled, in love and hate. All the warm salt water of the
bathing pool and the shouting and splashing and laughing were only just sufficient to bring
them together again.
Simon was not in the bathing pool as they had expected.
When the other two had trotted down the beach to look back at the mountain he had
followed them for a few yards and then stopped. He had stood frowing down at a pile of sand
on the beach where somebody had been trying to build a little house or hut. Then he turned
his back on this and walked into the forest with an air of purpose. He was a small, skinny boy,his chin pointed, and his eyes so bright they had deceived Ralph into thinking him delightfully
gay and wicked. The coarse mop of black hair was long and swung down, almost concealing a
low, broad forehead. He wore the remains of shorts and his feet were bare like Jack's. Always
darkish in color, Simon was burned by the sun to a deep tan that glistened with sweat.
He picked his way up the scar, passed the great rock where Ralph had climbed on the
first morning, then turned off to his right among the trees. He walked with an accustomed
tread through the acres of fruit trees, where the least energetic could find an easy if
unsatisfying meal. Flower and fruit grew together on the same tree and everywhere was the
scent of ripeness and the booming of a million bees at pasture. Here the littluns who had run
after him caught up with him. They talked, cried out unintelligibly, lugged him toward the
trees. Then, amid the roar of bees in the afternoon sunlight, Simon found for them the fruit
they could not reach, pulled off the choicest from up in the foliage, passed them back down to
the endless, outstretched hands. When he had satisfied them he paused and looked round.
The littluns watched him inscrutably over double handfuls of ripe fruit.
Simon turned away from them and went where the just perceptible path led him. Soon
high jungle closed in. Tall trunks bore unexpected pale flowers all the way up to the dark
canopy where life went on clamorously. The air here was dark too, and the creepers dropped
their ropes like the rigging of foundered ships. His feet left prints in the soft soil and the
creepers shivered throughout their lengths when he bumped them.
He came at last to a place where more sunshine fell. Since they had not so far to go for
light the creepers had woven a great mat that hung at the side of an open space in the jungle;
for here a patch of rock came close to the surface and would not allow more than little plants
and ferns to grow. The whole space was walled with dark aromatic bushes, and was a bowl of
heat and light. A great tree, fallen across one corner, leaned against the trees that still stood
and a rapid climber flaunted red and yellow sprays right to the top.
Simon paused. He looked over his shoulder as Jack had done at the close ways behind
him and glanced swiftly round to confirm that he was utterly alone. For a moment his
movements were almost furtive. Then he bent down and wormed his way into the center of
the mat. The creepers and the bushes were so close that he left his sweat on them and they
pulled together behind him. When he was secure in the middle he was in a little cabin
screened off from the open space by a few leaves. He squatted down, parted the leaves and
looked out into the clearing. Nothing moved but a pair of gaudy butterflies that danced round
each other in the hot air. Holding his breath he cocked a critical ear at the sounds of the
island. Evening was advancing toward the island; the sounds of the bright fantastic birds, the
bee-sounds, even the crying of the gulls that were returning to their roosts among the squarerocks, were fainter. The deep sea breaking miles away on the reef made an undertone less
perceptible than the susurration of the blood.
Simon dropped the screen of leaves back into place. The slope of the bars of honeycolored sunlight decreased; they slid up the bushes, passed over the green candle-like buds,
moved up toward the canopy, and darkness thickened under the trees. With the fading of the
light the riotous colors died and the heat and urgency cooled away. The candlebuds stirred.
Their green sepals drew back a little and the white tips of the flowers rose delicately to meet
the open air.
Now the sunlight had lifted clear of the open space and withdrawn from the sky.
Darkness poured out, submerging the ways between the trees till they were dim and strange as
the bottom of the sea. The candle-buds opened their wide white flowers glimmering under the
light that pricked down from the first stars. Their scent spilled out into the air and took
possession of the island.
CHAPTER FOUR
Painted Faces and Long Hair
The first rhythm that they became used to was the slow swing from dawn to quick
dusk. They accepted the pleasures of morning, the bright sun, the whelming sea and sweet air,
as a time when play was good and life so full that hope was not necessary and therefore
forgotten. Toward noon, as the floods of light fell more nearly to the perpendicular, the stark
colors of the morning were smoothed in pearl and opalescence; and the heat--as though the
impending sun's height gave it momentum--became a blow that they ducked, running to the
shade and lying there, perhaps even sleeping.
Strange things happened at midday. The glittering sea rose up, moved apart in planes of
blatant impossibility; the coral reef and the few stunted palms that clung to the more elevated
parts would float up into the sky, would quiver, be plucked apart, run like raindrops on a wire
or be repeated as in an odd succession of mirrors. Sometimes land loomed where there was no
land and flicked out like a bubble as the children watched. Piggy discounted all this learnedly
as a "mirage"; and since no boy could reach even the reef over the stretch of water where the
snapping sharks waited, they grew accustomed to these mysteries and ignored them, just as
they ignored the miraculous, throbbing stars. At midday the illusions merged into the sky and
there the sun gazed down like an angry eye. Then, at the end of the afternoon; the mirage
subsided and the horizon became level and blue and clipped as the sun declined. That was
another time of comparative coolness but menaced by the coming of the dark. When the sunsank, darkness dropped on the island like an extinguisher and soon the shelters were full of
restlessness, under the remote stars.
Nevertheless, the northern European tradition of work, play, and food right through
the day, made it possible for them to adjust themselves wholly to this new rhythm. The littlun
Percival had early crawled into a shelter and stayed there for two days, talking, singing, and
crying, till they thought him batty and were faintly amused. Ever since then he had been
peaked, red-eyed, and miserable; a littiun who played little and cried often.
The smaller boys were known now by the generic title of "littluns." The decrease in
size, from Ralph down, was gradual; and though there was a dubious region inhabited by
Simon and Robert and Maurice, nevertheless no one had any difficulty in recognizing biguns
at one end and littluns at the other. The undoubted littluns, those aged about six, led a quite
distinct, and at the same time intense, life of their own. They ate most of the day, picking fruit
where they could reach it and not particular about ripeness and quality. They were used now
to stomach-aches and a sort of chronic diarrhoea. They suffered untold terrors in the dark and
huddled together for comfort. Apart from food and sleep, they found time for play, aimless
and trivial, in the white sand by the bright water. They cried for their mothers much less often
than might have been expected; they were very brown, and filthily dirty. They obeyed the
summons of the conch, partly because Ralph blew it, and he was big enough to be a link with
the adult world of authority; and partly because they enjoyed the entertainment of the
assemblies. But otherwise they seldom bothered with the biguns and their passionately
emotional and corporate life was their own.
They had built castles in the sand at the bar of the little river. These castles were about
one foot high and were decorated with shells, withered flowers, and interesting stones. Round
the castles was a complex of marks, tracks, walls, railway lines, that were of significance only if
inspected with the eye at beach-level. The littluns played here, if not happily at least with
absorbed attention; and often as many as three of them would play the same game together.
Three were playing here now. Henry was the biggest of them. He was also a distant
relative of that other boy whose mulberry-marked face had not been seen since the evening of
the great fire; but he was not old enough to understand this, and if he had been told that the
other boy had gone home in an aircraft, he would have accepted the statement without fuss or
disbelief.
Henry was a bit of a leader this afternoon, because the other two were Percival and
Johnny, the smallest boys on the island. Percival was mouse-colored and had not been very
attractive even to his mother; Johnny was well built, with fair hair and a natural belligerence.
Just now he was being obedient because he was interested; and the three children, kneeling in
the sand, were at peace.Roger and Maurice came out of the forest. They were relieved from duty at the fire and
had come down for a swim. Roger led the way straight through the castles, kicking them over,
burying the flowers, scattering the chosen stones. Maurice followed, laughing, and added to
the destruction. The three littluns paused in their game and looked up. As it happened, the
particular marks in which they were interested had not been touched, so they made no
protest. Only Percival began to whimper with an eyeful of sand and Maurice hurried away. In
his other life Maurice had received chastisement for filling a younger eye with sand. Now,
though there was no parent to let fall a heavy hand, Maurice still felt the unease of
wrongdoing. At the back of his mind formed the uncertain outlines of an excuse. He muttered
something about a swim and broke into a trot.
Roger remained, watching the littluns. He was not noticeably darker than when he had
dropped in, but the shock of black hair, down his nape and low on his forehead, seemed to suit
his gloomy face and made what had seemed at first an unsociable remoteness into something
forbidding. Percival finished his whimper and went on playing, for the tears had washed the
sand away. Johnny watched him with china-blue eyes; then began to fling up sand in a shower,
and presently Percival was crying again.
When Henry tired of his play and wandered off along the beach, Roger followed him,
keeping beneath the palms and drifting casually in the same direction. Henry walked at a
distance from the palms and the shade because he was too young to keep himself out of the
sun. He went down the beach and busied himself at the water's edge. The great Pacific tide
was coming in and every few seconds the relatively still water of the lagoon heaved forwards an
inch. There were creatures that lived in this last fling of the sea, tiny transparencies that came
questing in with the water over the hot, dry sand. With impalpable organs of sense they
examined this new field. Perhaps food had appeared where at the last incursion there had been
none; bird droppings, insects perhaps, any of the strewn detritus of landward life. Like a
myriad of tiny teeth in a saw, the transparencies came scavenging over the beach.
This was fascinating to Henry. He poked about with a bit of stick, that itself was waveworn and whitened and a vagrant, and tried to control the motions of the scavengers. He made
little runnels that the tide filled and tried to crowd them with creatures. He became absorbed
beyond mere happiness as he felt himself exercising control over living things. He talked to
them, urging them, ordering them. Driven back by the tide, his footprints became bays in
which they were trapped and gave him the illusion of mastery. He squatted on his hams at the
water's edge, bowed, with a shock of hair falling over his forehead and past his eyes, and the
afternoon sun emptied down invisible arrows.
Roger waited too. At first he had hidden behind a great palm; but Henry's absorption
with the transparencies was so obvious that at last he stood out in full view. He looked alongthe beach. Percival had gone off, crying, and Johnny was left in triumphant possession of the
castles, He sat there, crooning to himself and throwing sand at an imaginary Percival. Beyond
him, Roger could see the platform and the glints of spray where Ralph and Simon and Piggy
and Maurice were diving in the pool. He listened carefully but could only just hear them.
A sudden breeze shook the fringe of palm trees, so that the fronds tossed and fluttered.
Sixty feet above Roger, several nuts, fibrous lumps as big as rugby balls, were loosed from their
stems. They fell about him with a series of hard thumps and he was not touched. Roger did
not consider his escape, but looked from the nuts to Henry and back again.
The subsoil beneath the palm trees was a raised beach, and generations of palms had
worked loose in this the stones that had lain on the sands of another shore. Roger stooped,
picked up a stone, aimed, and threw it at Henry-- threw it to miss. The stone, that token of
preposterous time, bounced five yards to Henry's right and fell in the water. Roger gathered a
handful of stones and began to throw them. Yet there was a space round Henry, perhaps six
yards in diameter, into which he dare not throw. Here, invisible yet strong, was the taboo of
the old life. Round the squatting child was the protection of parents and school and policemen
and the law. Roger's arm was conditioned by a civilization that knew nothing of him and was
in ruins.
Henry was surprised by the plopping sounds in the water. He abandoned the noiseless
transparencies and pointed at the center of the spreading rings like a setter. This side and that
the stones fell, and Henry turned obediently but always too late to see the stones in the air. At
last he saw one and laughed, looking for the friend who was teasing him. But Roger had
whipped behind the palm again, was leaning against it breathing quickly, his eyelids fluttering.
Then Henry lost interest in stones and wandered off.
"Roger."
Jack was standing under a tree about ten yards away. When Roger opened his eyes and
saw him, a darker shadow crept beneath the swarthiness of his skin; but Jack noticed nothing.
He was eager, impatient, beckoning, so that Roger went to him.
There was a small pool at the end of the river, dammed back by sand and full of white
water-lilies and needle-like reeds. Here Sam and Eric were waiting, and Bill. Jack, concealed
from the sun, knelt by the pool and opened the two large leaves that he carried. One of them
contained white clay, and the other red. By them lay a stick of charcoal brought down from
the fire.
Jack explained to Roger as he worked.
"They don't smell me. They see me, I think. Something pink, under the trees."
He smeared on the clay.
"If only I'd some green!"He turned a half-concealed face up to Roger and answered the incomprehension of his
gaze.
"For hunting. Like in the war. You know--dazzle paint. Like things trying to look like
something else--" He twisted in the urgency of telling. "--Like moths on a tree trunk."
Roger understood and nodded gravely. The twins moved toward Jack and began to
protest timidly about something. Jack waved them away.
"Shut up."
He rubbed the charcoal stick between the patches of red and white on his face.
"No. You two come with me."
He peered at his reflection and disliked it. He bent down, took up a double handful of
lukewarm water and rubbed the mess from his face. Freckles and sandy eyebrows appeared.
Roger smiled, unwillingly.
"You don't half look a mess."
Jack planned his new face. He made one cheek and one eye-socket white, then he
rubbed red over the other half of his face and slashed a black bar of charcoal across from right
ear to left jaw. He looked in the pool for his reflection, but his breathing troubled the mirror.
"Samneric. Get me a coconut. An empty one."
He knelt, holding the shell of water. A rounded patch of sunlight fell on his face and a
brightness appeared in the depths of the water. He looked in astonishment, no longer at
himself but at an awesome stranger. He spilt the water and leapt to his feet, laughing excitedly.
Beside the pool his sinewy body held up a mask that drew their eyes and appalled them. He
began to dance and his laughter became a bloodthirsty snarling. He capered toward Bill, and
the mask was a thing on its own, behind which Jack hid, liberated from shame and selfconsciousness. The face of red and white and black swung through the air and jigged toward
Bill. Bill started up laughing; then suddenly he fell silent and blundered away through the
bushes.
Jack rushed toward the twins.
"The rest are making a line. Come on!"
"But--"
"--we--"
"Come on! I'll creep up and stab--"
The mask compelled them.
Ralph climbed out of the bathing pool and trotted up the beach and sat in the shade
beneath the palms. His fair hair was plastered over his eyebrows and he pushed it back. Simon
was floating in the water and kicking with his feet, and Maurice was practicing diving. Piggywas mooning about, aimlessly picking up things and discarding them. The rock-pools which so
fascinated him were covered by the tide, so he was without an interest until the tide went
back. Presently, seeing Ralph under the palms, he came and sat by him.
Piggy wore the remainders of a pair of shorts, his fat body was golden brown, and the
glasses still flashed when he looked at anything. He was the only boy on the island whose hair
never seemed to grow. The rest were shockheaded, but Piggy's hair still lay in wisps over his
head as though baldness were his natural state and this imperfect covering would soon go, like
the velvet on a young stag's antlers.
"I've been thinking," he said, "about a clock. We could make a sundial. We could put a
stick in the sand, and then--"
The effort to express the mathematical processes involved was too great. He made a
few passes instead.
"And an airplane, and a TV set," said Ralph sourly, "and a steam engine."
Piggy shook his head.
"You have to have a lot of metal things for that," he said, "and we haven't got no metal.
But we got a stick."
Ralph turned and smiled involuntarily. Piggy was a bore; his fat, his ass-mar and his
matter-of-fact ideas were dull, but there was always a little pleasure to be got out of pulling his
leg, even if one did it by accident.
Piggy saw the smile and misinterpreted it as friendliness. There had grown up tacitly
among the biguns the opinion that Piggy was an outsider, not only by accent, which did not
matter, but by fat, and ass-mar, and specs, and a certain disinclination for manual labor. Now,
finding that something he had said made Ralph smile, he rejoiced and pressed his advantage.
"We got a lot of sticks. We could have a sundial each. Then we should know what the
time was."
"A fat lot of good that would be."
"You said you wanted things done. So as we could be rescued."
"Oh, shut up."
He leapt to his feet and trotted back to the pool, just as Maurice did a rather poor dive.
Ralph was glad of a chance to change the subject. He shouted as Maurice came to the surface.
"Belly flop! Belly flop!"
Maurice flashed a smile at Ralph who slid easily into the water. Of all the boys, he was
the most at home there; but today, irked by the mention of rescue, the useless, footling
mention of rescue, even the green depths of water and the shattered, golden sun held no balm.
Instead of remaining and playing, he swam with steady strokes under Simon and crawled out
of the other side of the pool to lie there, sleek and streaming like a seal. Piggy, always clumsy,stood up and came to stand by him, so that Ralph rolled on his stomach and pretended not to
see. The mirages had died away and gloomily he ran his eye along the taut blue line of the
horizon.
The next moment he was on his feet and shouting.
"Smoke! Smoke!"
Simon tried to sit up in the water and got a mouthful. Maurice, who had been standing
ready to dive, swayed back on his heels, made a bolt for the platform, then swerved back to the
grass under the palms. There he started to pull on his tattered shorts, to be ready for anything.
Ralph stood, one hand holding back his hair, the other clenched. Simon was climbing
out of the water. Piggy was rubbing his glasses on his shorts and squinting at the sea. Maurice
had got both legs through one leg of his shorts. Of all the boys, only Ralph was still.
"I can't see no smoke," said Piggy incredulously. "I can't see no smoke, Ralph--where is
it?"
Ralph said nothing. Now both his hands were clenched over his forehead so that the
fair hair was kept out of his eyes. He was leaning forward and already the salt was whitening
his body.
"Ralph--where's the ship?"
Simon stood by, looking from Ralph to the horizon. Maurice's trousers gave way with a
sigh and he abandoned them as a wreck, rushed toward the forest, and then came back again.
The smoke was a tight little knot on the horizon and was uncoiling slowly. Beneath the
smoke was a dot that might be a funnel. Ralph's face was pale as he spoke to himself.
"They'll see our smoke."
Piggy was looking in the right direction now.
"It don't look much."
He turned round and peered up at the mountain. Ralph continued to watch the ship,
ravenously. Color was coming back into his face. Simon stood by him, silent.
"I know I can't see very much," said Piggy, "but have we got any smoke?"
Ralph moved impatiently, still watching the ship.
"The smoke on the mountain."
Maurice came running, and stared out to sea. Both Simon and Piggy were looking up at
the mountain. Piggy screwed up his face but Simon cried out as though he had hurt himself.
"Ralph! Ralph!"
The quality of his speech twisted Ralph on the sand.
"You tell me," said Piggy anxiously. "Is there a signal?"
Ralph looked back at the dispersing smoke in the horizon, then up at the mountain.
"Ralph--please! Is there a signal?"Simon put out his hand, timidly, to touch Ralph; but Ralph started to run, splashing
through the shallow end of the bathing pool, across the hot, white sand and under the palms.
A moment later he was battling with the complex undergrowth that was already engulfing the
scar. Simon ran after him, then Maurice. Piggy shouted.
"Ralph! Please--Ralph!"
Then he too started to run, stumbling over Maurice's discarded shorts before he was
across the terrace. Behind the four boys, the smoke moved gently along the horizon; and on
the beach, Henry and Johnny were throwing sand at Percival who was crying quietly again; and
all three were in complete ignorance of the excitement.
By the time Ralph had reached the landward end of the scar he was using precious
breath to swear. He did desperate violence to his naked body among the rasping creepers so
that blood was sliding over him. Just where the steep ascent of the mountain began, he
stopped. Maurice was only a few yards behind him.
"Piggy's specs!" shouted Ralph. "If the fire's all out, we'll need them--"
He stopped shouting and swayed on his feet. Piggy was only just visible, bumbling up
from the beach. Ralph looked at the horizon, then up to the mountain. Was it better to fetch
Piggy's glasses, or would the ship have gone? Or if they climbed on, supposing the fire was all
out, and they had to watch Piggy crawling nearer and the ship sinking under the horizon?
Balanced on a high peak of need, agonized by indecision, Ralph cried out:
"Oh God, oh God!"
Simon, struggling with the bushes, caught his breath. His face was twisted. Ralph
blundered on, savaging himself, as the wisp of smoke moved on.
The fire was dead. They saw that straight away; saw what they had really known down
on the beach when the smoke of home had beckoned. The fire was out, smokeless and dead;
the watchers were gone. A pile of unused fuel lay ready.
Ralph turned to the sea. The horizon stretched, impersonal once more, barren of all
but the faintest trace of smoke. Ralph ran stumbling along the rocks, saved himself on the
edge of the pink cliff, and screamed at the ship.
"Come back! Come back!"
He ran backwards and forwards along the cliff, his face always to the sea, and his voice
rose insanely.
"Come back! Come back!"
Simon and Maurice arrived. Ralph looked at them with unwinking eyes. Simon turned
away, smearing the water from his cheeks. Ralph reached inside himself for the worst word he
knew.
"They let the bloody fire go out."He looked down the unfriendly side of the mountain. Piggy arrived, out of breath and
whimpering like a littlun. Ralph clenched his fist and went very red. The intentness of his
gaze, the bitterness of his voice, pointed for him.
"There they are."
A procession had appeared, far down among the pink stones that lay near the water's
edge. Some of the boys wore black caps but otherwise they were almost naked. They lifted
sticks in the air together whenever they came to an easy patch. They were chanting,
something to do with the bundle that the errant twins carried so carefully. Ralph picked out
Jack easily, even at that distance, tall, red-haired, and inevitably leading the procession.
Simon looked now, from Ralph to Jack, as he had looked from Ralph to the horizon,
and what he saw seemed to make him afraid. Ralph said nothing more, but waited while the
procession came nearer. The chant was audible but at that distance still wordless. Behind Jack
walked the twins, carrying a great stake on their shoulders. The gutted carcass of a pig swung
from the stake, swinging heavily as the twins toiled over the uneven ground. The pig's head
hung down with gaping neck and seemed to search for something on the ground. At last the
words of the chant floated up to them, across the bowl of blackened wood and ashes.
"_Kill the pig. Cut her throat. Spill her blood._"
Yet as the words became audible, the procession reached the steepest part of the
mountain, and in a minute or two the chant had died away. Piggy sniveled and Simon shushed
him quickly as though he had spoken too loudly in church.
Jack, his face smeared with clays, reached the top first and hailed Ralph excitedly, with
lifted spear.
"Look! We've killed a pig--we stole up on them--we got in a circle--"
Voices broke in from the hunters.
"We got in a circle--"
"We crept up--"
"The pig squealed--"
The twins stood with the pig swinging between them, dropping black gouts on the
rock. They seemed to share one wide, ecstatic grin. Jack had too many things to tell Ralph at
once. Instead, he danced a step or two, then remembered his dignity and stood still, grinning.
He noticed blood on his hands and grimaced distastefully, looked for something on which to
clean them, then wiped them on his shorts and laughed.
Ralph spoke.
"You let the fire go out."
Jack checked, vaguely irritated by this irrelevance but too happy to let it worry him."We can light the fire again. You should have been with us, Ralph. We had a smashing
time. The twins got knocked over--"
"We hit the pig--"
"--I fell on top--"
"I cut the pig's throat," said Jack, proudly, and yet twitched as he said it. "Can I borrow
yours, Ralph, to make a nick in the hilt?"
The boys chattered and danced. The twins continued to grin.
"There was lashings of blood," said Jack, laughing and shuddering, "you should have
seen it!"
"We'll go hunting every day--"
Ralph spoke again, hoarsely. He had not moved.
"You let the fire go out."
This repetition made Jack uneasy. He looked at the twins and then back at Ralph.
"We had to have them in the hunt," he said, "or there wouldn't have been enough for a
ring."
He flushed, conscious of a fault.
"The fire's only been out an hour or two. We can light up again--"
He noticed Ralph's scarred nakedness, and the sombre silence of all four of them. He
sought, charitable in his happiness, to include them in the thing that had happened. His mind
was crowded with memories; memories of the knowledge that had come to them when they
closed in on the struggling pig, knowledge that they had outwitted a living thing, imposed
their will upon it, taken away its life like a long satisfying drink.
He spread his arms wide.
"You should have seen the blood!"
The hunters were more silent now, but at this they buzzed again. Ralph flung back his
hair. One arm pointed at the empty horizon. His voice was loud and savage, and struck them
into silence.
"There was aship."
Jack, faced at once with too many awful implications, ducked away from them. He laid
a hand on the pig and drew his knife. Ralph brought his arm down, fist clenched, and his voice
shook.
"There was a ship. Out there. You said you'd keep the fire going and you let it out!" He
took a step toward Jack, who turned and faced him.
"They might have seen us. We might have gone home--"
This was too bitter for Piggy, who forgot his timidity in the agony of his loss. He began
to cry out, shrilly:"You and your blood, Jack Merridew! You and your hunting! We might have gone
home--"
Ralph pushed Piggy to one side.
"I was chief, and you were going to do what I said. You talk. But you can't even build
huts--then you go off hunting and let out the fire--"
He turned away, silent for a moment. Then his voice came again on a peak of feeling.
"There was a ship--"
One of the smaller hunters began to wail. The dismal truth was filtering through to
everybody. Jack went very red as he hacked and pulled at the pig.
"The job was too much. We needed everyone."
Ralph turned.
"You could have had everyone when the shelters were finished. But you had to hunt--"
"We needed meat."
Jack stood up as he said this, the bloodied knife in his hand. The two boys faced each
other. There was the brilliant world of hunting, tactics, fierce exhilaration, skill; and there was
the world of longing and baffled commonsense. Jack transferred the knife to his left hand and
smudged blood over his forehead as he pushed down the plastered hair.
Piggy began again.
"You didn't ought to have let that fire out. You said you'd keep the smoke going--"
This from Piggy, and the wails of agreement from some of the hunters, drove Jack to
violence. The bolting look came into his blue eyes. He took a step, and able at last to hit
someone, stuck his fist into Piggy's stomach. Piggy sat down with a grunt. Jack stood over him.
His voice was vicious with humiliation.
"You would, would you? Fatty!"
Ralph made a step forward and Jack smacked Piggy's head. Piggy's glasses flew off and
tinkled on the rocks. Piggy cried out in terror:
"My specs!"
He went crouching and feeling over the rocks but Simon, who got there first, found
them for him. Passions beat about Simon on the mountain-top with awful wings.
"One side's broken."
Piggy grabbed and put on the glasses. He looked malevolently at Jack.
"I got to have them specs. Now I only got one eye. Jus' you wait--"
Jack made a move toward Piggy who scrambled away till a great rock lay between them.
He thrust his head over the top and glared at Jack through his one flashing glass.
"Now I only got one eye. Just you wait--"
Jack mimicked the whine and scramble."Jus' you wait--yah!"
Piggy and the parody were so funny that the hunters began to laugh. Jack felt
encouraged. He went on scrambling and the laughter rose to a gale of hysteria. Unwillingly
Ralph felt his lips twitch; he was angry with himself for giving way.
He muttered.
"That was a dirty trick."
Jack broke out of his gyration and stood facing Ralph. His words came in a shout.
"All right, all right!"
He looked at Piggy, at the hunters, at Ralph.
"I'm sorry. About the fire, I mean. There. I--"
He drew himself up.
"--I apologize."
The buzz from the hunters was one of admiration at this handsome behavior. Clearly
they were of the opinion that Jack had done the decent thing, had put himself in the right by
his generous apology and Ralph, obscurely, in the wrong. They waited for an appropriately
decent answer.
Yet Ralph's throat refused to pass one. He resented, as an addition to Jack's
misbehavior, this verbal trick. The fire was dead, the ship was gone. Could they not see? Anger
instead of decency passed his throat.
"That was a dirty trick."
They were silent on the mountain-top while the opaque look appeared in Jack's eyes
and passed away.
Ralph's final word was an ingracious mutter.
"All right. Light the fire."
With some positive action before them, a little of the tension died. Ralph said no
more, did nothing, stood looking down at the ashes round his feet. Jack was loud and active.
He gave orders, sang, whistled, threw remarks at the silent Ralph--remarks that did not need
an answer, and therefore could not invite a snub; and still Ralph was silent. No one, not even
Jack, would ask him to move and in the end they had to build the fire three yards away and in
a place not really as convenient.
So Ralph asserted his chieftainship and could not have chosen a better way if he had
thought for days. Against this weapon, so indefinable and so effective, Jack was powerless and
raged without knowing why. By the time the pile was built, they were on different sides of a
high barrier.When they had dealt with the fire another crisis arose. Jack had no means of lighting it.
Then to his surprise, Ralph went to Piggy and took the glasses from him. Not even Ralph
knew how a link between him and Jack had been snapped and fastened elsewhere.
"I'll bring 'em back."
"I'll come too."
Piggy stood behind him, islanded in a sea of meaningless color, while Ralph knelt and
focused the glossy spot. Instantly the fire was alight, Piggy held out his hands and grabbed the
glasses back.
Before these fantastically attractive flowers of violet and red and yellow, unkindness
melted away. They became a circle of boys round a camp fire and even Piggy and Ralph were
half-drawn in. Soon some of the boys were rushing down the slope for more wood while Jack
hacked the pig. They tried holding the whole carcass on a stake over the fire, but the stake
burnt more quickly than the pig roasted. In the end they skewered bits of meat on branches
and held them in the flames: and even then almost as much boy was roasted as meat.
Ralph's mouth watered. He meant to refuse meat, but his past diet of fruit and nuts,
with an odd crab or fish, gave him too little resistance. He accepted a piece of halfraw meat
and gnawed it like a wolf.
Piggy spoke, also dribbling.
"Aren't I having none?"
Jack had meant to leave him in doubt, as an assertion of power; but Piggy by advertising
his omission made more cruelty necessary.
"You didn't hunt."
"No more did Ralph," said Piggy wetly, "nor Simon." He amplified. "There isn't more
than a ha'porth of meat in a crab."
Ralph stirred uneasily. Simon, sitting between the twins and Piggy, wiped his mouth
and shoved his piece of meat over the rocks to Piggy, who grabbed it. The twins giggled and
Simon lowered his face in shame.
Then Jack leapt to his feet, slashed off a great hunk of meat, and flung it down at
Simon's feet.
"Eat! Damn you!"
He glared at Simon.
"Take it!"
He spun on his heel, center of a bewildered circle of boys.
"I got you meat!"
Numberless and inexpressible frustrations combined to make his rage elemental and
awe-inspiring."I painted my face--I stole up. Now you eat--all of you--and I--"
Slowly the silence on the mountain-top deepened till the click of the fire and the soft
hiss of roasting meat could be heard clearly. Jack looked round for understanding but found
only respect. Ralph stood among the ashes of the signal fire, his hands full of meat, saying
nothing.
Then at last Maurice broke the silence. He changed the subject to the only one that
could bring the majority of them together.
"Where did you find the pig?"
Roger pointed down the unfriendly side. "They were there--by the sea."
Jack, recovering could not bear to have his story told. He broke in quickly.
"We spread round. I crept, on hands and knees. The spears fell out because they hadn't
barbs on. The pig ran away and made an awful noise--"
"It turned back and ran into the circle, bleeding--"
All the boys were talking at once, relieved and excited.
"We closed in--"
The first blow had paralyzed its hind quarters, so then the circle could close in and beat
and beat--
"I cut the pig's throat--"
The twins, still sharing their identical grin, jumped up and ran round each other. Then
the rest joined in, making pig-dying noises and shouting.
"One for his nob!"
"Give him a fourpenny one!"
Then Maurice pretended to be the pig and ran squealing into the center, and the
hunters, circling still, pretended to beat him. As they danced, they sang.
"_Kill the pig. Cut her throat. Bash her in._"
Ralph watched them, envious and resentful. Not till they flagged and the chant died
away, did he speak.
"I'm calling an assembly."
One by one, they halted, and stood watching him.
"With the conch. I'm calling a meeting even if we have to go on into the dark. Down
on the platform. When I blow it. Now."
He turned away and walked off, down the mountain.CHAPTER FIVE
Beast from Water
The tide was coming in and there was only a narrow strip of firm beach between the
water and the white, stumbling stuff near the palm terrace. Ralph chose the firm strip as a
path because he needed to think, and only here could he allow his feet to move without having
to watch them. Suddenly, pacing by the water, he was overcome with astonishment. He found
himself understanding the wearisomeness of this life, where every path was an improvisation
and a considerable part of one's waking life was spent watching one's feet. He stopped, facing
the strip; and remembering that first enthusiastic exploration as though it were part of a
brighter childhood, he smiled jeeringly. He turned then and walked back toward the platform
with the sun in his face. The time had come for the assembly and as he walked into the
concealing splendors of the sunlight he went carefully over the points of his speech. There
must be no mistake about this assembly, no chasing imaginary. . . .
He lost himself in a maze of thoughts that were rendered vague by his lack of words to
express them. Frowning, he tried again.
This meeting must not be fun, but business.
At that he walked faster, aware all at once of urgency and the declining sun and a little
wind created by his speed that breathed about his face. This wind pressed his grey shirt against
his chest so that he noticed--in this new mood of comprehension--how the folds were stiff like
cardboard, and unpleasant; noticed too how the frayed edges of his shorts were making an
uncomfortable, pink area on the front of his thighs. With a convulsion of the mind, Ralph
discovered dirt and decay, understood how much he disliked perpetually flicking the tangled
hair out of his eyes, and at last, when the sun was gone, rolling noisily to rest among dry leaves.
At that he began to trot.
The beach near the bathing pool was dotted with groups of boys waiting for the
assembly. They made way for him silently, conscious of his grim mood and the fault at the fire.
The place of assembly in which he stood was roughly a triangle; but irregular and
sketchy, like everything they made. First there was the log on which he himself sat; a dead tree
that must have been quite exceptionally big for the platform. Perhaps one of those legendary
storms of the Pacific had shifted it here. This palm trunk lay parallel to the beach, so that
when Ralph sat he faced the island but to the boys was a darkish figure against the shimmer of
the lagoon. The two sides of the triangle of which the log was base were less evenly defined.
On the right was a log polished by restless seats along the top, but not so large as the chief's
and not so comfortable. On the left were four small logs, one of them--the farthest--
lamentably springy. Assembly after assembly had broken up in laughter when someone hadleaned too far back and the log had whipped and thrown half a dozen boys backwards into the
grass. Yet now, he saw, no one had had the wit--not himself nor Jack, nor Piggy--to bring a
stone and wedge the thing. So they would continue enduring the ill-balanced twister, because,
because. . . . Again he lost himself in deep waters.
Grass was worn away in front of each trunk but grew tall and untrodden in the center
of the triangle. Then, at the apex, the grass was thick again because no one sat there. All round
the place of assembly the grey trunks rose, straight or leaning, and supported the low roof of
leaves. On two sides was the beach; behind, the lagoon; in front, the darkness of the island.
Ralph turned to the chief's seat. They had never had an assembly as late before. That
was why the place looked so different. Normally the underside of the green roof was lit by a
tangle of golden reflections, and their faces were lit upside down--like, thought Ralph, when
you hold an electric torch in your hands. But now the sun was slanting in at one side, so that
the shadows were where they ought to be.
Again he fell into that strange mood of speculation that was so foreign to him. If faces
were different when lit from above or below--what was a face? What was anything?
Ralph moved impatiently. The trouble was, if you were a chief you had to think, you
had to be wise. And then the occasion slipped by so that you had to grab at a decision. This
made you think; because thought was a valuable thing, that got results. . . .
Only, decided Ralph as he faced the chief's seat, I can't think. Not like Piggy.
Once more that evening Ralph had to adjust his values. Piggy could think. He could go
step by step inside that fat head of his, only Piggy was no chief. But Piggy, for all his ludicrous
body, had brains. Ralph was a specialist in thought now, and could recognize thought in
another.
The sun in his eyes reminded him how time was passing, so he took the conch down
from the tree and examined the surface. Exposure to the air had bleached the yellow and pink
to near-white, and transparency. Ralph felt a kind of affectionate reverence for the conch,
even though he had fished the thing out of the lagoon himself. He faced the place of assembly
and put the conch to his lips.
The others were waiting for this and came straight away. Those who were aware that a
ship had passed the island while the fire was out were subdued by the thought of Ralph's
anger; while those, including the littluns who did not know, were impressed by the general air
of solemnity. The place of assembly filled quickly; Jack, Simon, Maurice, most of the hunters,
on Ralph's right; the rest on the left, under the sun. Piggy came and stood outside the triangle.
This indicated that he wished to listen, but would not speak; and Piggy intended it as a gesture
of disapproval.
"The thing is: we need an assembly."No one said anything but the faces turned to Ralph were intent. He flourished the
conch. He had learnt as a practical business that fundamental statements like this had to be
said at least twice, before everyone understood them. One had to sit, attracting all eyes to the
conch, and drop words like heavy round stones among the little groups that crouched or
squatted. He was searching his mind for simple words so that even the littluns would
understand what the assembly was about. Later perhaps, practiced debaters--Jack, Maurice,
Piggy--would use their whole art to twist the meeting: but now at the beginning the subject of
the debate must be laid out clearly.
"We need an assembly. Not for fun. Not for laughing and falling off the log"--the group
of littluns on the twister giggled and looked at each other--"not for making jokes, or for"--he
lifted the conch in an effort to find the compelling word--"for cleverness. Not for these things.
But to put things straight."
He paused for a moment.
"I've been alone. By myself I went, thinking what's what. I know what we need. An
assembly to put things straight. And first of all, I'm speaking."
He paused for a moment and automatically pushed back his hair. Piggy tiptoed to the
triangle, his ineffectual protest made, and joined the others.
Ralph went on.
"We have lots of assemblies. Everybody enjoys speaking and being together. We decide
things. But they don't get done. We were going to have water brought from the stream and
left in those coconut shells under fresh leaves. So it was, for a few days. Now there's no water.
The shells are dry. People drink from the river."
There was a murmur of assent.
"Not that there's anything wrong with drinking from the river. I mean I'd sooner have
water from that place-- you know, the pool where the waterfall is--than out of an old coconut
shell. Only we said we'd have the water brought. And now not. There were only two full shells
there this afternoon."
He licked his lips.
"Then there's huts. Shelters."
The murmur swelled again and died away.
"You mostly sleep in shelters. Tonight, except for Samneric up by the fire, you'll all
sleep there. Who built the shelters?"
Clamor rose at once. Everyone had built the shelters. Ralph had to wave the conch
once more.
"Wait a minute! I mean, who built all three? We all built the first one, four of us the
second one, and me 'n Simon built the last one over there. That's why it's so tottery. No.Don't laugh. That shelter might fall down if the rain comes back. We'll need those shelters
then."
He paused and cleared his throat.
"There's another thing. We chose those rocks right along beyond the bathing pool as a
lavatory. That was sensible too. The tide cleans the place up. You littluns know about that."
There were sniggers here and there and swift glances.
"Now people seem to use anywhere. Even near the shelters and the platform. You
littluns, when you're getting fruit; if you're taken short--"
The assembly roared.
"I said if you're taken short you keep away from the fruit. That's dirty!"
Laughter rose again.
"I said that's dirty!"
He plucked at his stiff, grey shirt.
"That's really dirty. If you're taken short you go right along the beach to the rocks.
See?"
Piggy held out his hands for the conch but Ralph shook his head. His speech was
planned, point by point.
"We've all got to use the rocks again. This place is getting dirty." He paused. The
assembly, sensing a crisis, was tensely expectant. "And then: about the fire."
Ralph let out his spare breath with a little gasp that was echoed by his audience. Jack
started to chip a piece of wood with his knife and whispered something to Robert, who looked
away.
"The fire is the most important thing on the island. How can we ever be rescued except
by luck, if we don't keep a fire going? Is a fire too much for us to make?"
He flung out an arm.
"Look at us! How many are we? And yet we can't keep a fire going to make smoke.
Don't you understand? Can't you see we ought to--ought to die before we let the fire out?"
There was a self-conscious giggling among the hunters. Ralph turned on them
passionately.
"You hunters! You can laugh! But I tell you the smoke is more important than the pig,
however often you kill one. Do all of you see?" He spread his arms wide and turned to the
whole triangle.
"We've got to make smoke up there--or die."
He paused, feeling for his next point.
"And another thing."
Someone called out."Too many things."
There came a mutter of agreement. Ralph overrode them.
"And another thing. We nearly set the whole island on fire. And we waste time, rolling
rocks, and making little cooking fires. Now I say this and make it a rule, because I'm chief.
We won't have a fire anywhere but on the mountain. Ever."
There was a row immediately. Boys stood up and shouted and Ralph shouted back.
"Because if you want a fire to cook fish or crab, you can jolly well go up the mountain.
That way we'll be certain."
Hands were reaching for the conch in the light of the setting sun. He held on and leapt
on the trunk.
"All this I meant to say. Now I've said it. You voted me for chief. Now you do what I
say."
They quieted, slowly, and at last were seated again. Ralph dropped down and spoke in
his ordinary voice.
"So remember. The rocks for a lavatory. Keep the fire going and smoke showing as a
signal. Don't take fire from the mountain. Take your food up there."
Jack stood up, scowling in the gloom, and held out his hands.
"I haven't finished yet."
"But you've talked and talked!"
"I've got the conch."
Jack sat down, grumbling.
"Then the last thing. This is what people can talk about."
He waited till the platform was very still.
"Things are breaking up. I don't understand why. We began well; we were happy. And
then--"
He moved the conch gently, looking beyond them at nothing, remembering the
beastie, the snake, the fire, the talk of fear.
"Then people started getting frightened."
A murmur, almost a moan, rose and passed away. Jack had stopped whittling. Ralph
went on, abruptly.
"But that's littluns' talk. We'll get that straight. So the last part, the bit we can all talk
about, is kind of deciding on the fear."
The hair was creeping into his eyes again.
"We've got to talk about this fear and decide there's nothing in it. I'm frightened
myself, sometimes; only that's nonsense! Like bogies. Then, when we've decided, we can startagain and be careful about things like the fire." A picture of three boys walking along the
bright beach flitted through his mind. "And be happy."
Ceremonially, Ralph laid the conch on the trunk beside him as a sign that the speech
was over. What sunlight reached them was level.
Jack stood up and took the conch.
"So this is a meeting to find out what's what. I'll tell you what's what. You littluns
started all this, with the fear talk. Beasts! Where from? Of course we're frightened sometimes
but we put up with being frightened. Only Ralph says you scream in the night. What does that
mean but nightmares? Anyway, you don't hunt or build or help--you're a lot of cry-babies and
sissies. That's what. And as for the fear--you'll have to put up with that like the rest of us."
Ralph looked at Jack open-mouthed, but Jack took no notice.
"The thing is--fear can't hurt you any more than a dream. There aren't any beasts to be
afraid of on this island." He looked along the row of whispering littluns. "Serve you right if
something did get you, you useless lot of cry-babies! But there is no animal--"
Ralph interrupted him testily.
"What is all this? Who said anything about an animal?"
"You did, the other day. You said they dream and cry out. Now they talk--not only the
littluns, but my hunters sometimes--talk of a thing, a dark thing, a beast, some sort of animal.
I've heard. You thought not, didn't you? Now listen. You don't get big animals on small
islands. Only pigs. You only get lions and tigers in big countries like Africa and India--"
"And the Zoo--"
"I've got the conch. I'm not talking about the fear. I'm talking about the beast. Be
frightened if you like. But as for the beast--"
Jack paused, cradling the conch, and turned to his hunters with their dirty black caps.
"Am I a hunter or am I not?"
They nodded, simply. He was a hunter all right. No one doubted that.
"Well then--I've been all over this island. By myself. If there were a beast I'd have seen
it. Be frightened because you're like that--but there is no beast in the forest."
Jack handed back the conch and sat down. The whole assembly applauded him with
relief. Then Piggy held out his hand.
"I don't agree with all Jack said, but with some. 'Course there isn't a beast in the forest.
How could there be? What would a beast eat?"
"Pig."
"We eat pig."
"Piggy!""I got the conch!" said Piggy indignantly. "Ralph-- they ought to shut up, oughtn't
they? You shut up, you littluns! What I mean is that I don't agree about this here fear. Of
course there isn't nothing to be afraid of in the forest. Why--I been there myself! You'll be
talking about ghosts and such things next. We know what goes on and if there's something
wrong, there's someone to put it right."
He took off his glasses and blinked at them. The sun had gone as if the light had been
turned off.
He proceeded to explain.
"If you get a pain in your stomach, whether it's a little one or a big one--"
"Yours is a big one."
"When you done laughing perhaps we can get on with the meeting. And if them littluns
climb back on the twister again they'll only fall off in a sec. So they might as well sit on the
ground and listen. No. You have doctors for everything, even the inside of your mind. You
don't really mean that we got to be frightened all the time of nothing? Life," said Piggy
expansively, "is scientific, that's what it is. In a year or two when the war's over they'll be
traveling to Mars and back. I know there isn't no beast--not with claws and all that, I mean--
but I know there isn't no fear, either."
Piggy paused.
"Unless--"
Ralph moved restlessly.
"Unless what?"
"Unless we get frightened of people."
A sound, half-laugh, half-jeer, rose among the seated boys. Piggy ducked his head and
went on hastily.
"So let's hear from that littlun who talked about a beast and perhaps we can show him
how silly he is."
The littluns began to jabber among themselves, then one stood forward.
"What's your name?"
"Phil."
For a littlun he was self-confident, holding out his hands, cradling the conch as Ralph
did, looking round at them to collect their attention before he spoke.
"Last night I had a dream, a horrid dream, fighting with things. I was outside the
shelter by myself, fighting with things, those twisty things in the trees."
He paused, and the other littluns laughed in horrified sympathy.
"Then I was frightened and I woke up. And I was outside the shelter by myself in the
dark and the twisty things had gone away."The vivid horror of this, so possible and so nakedly terrifying, held them all silent. The
child's voice went piping on from behind the white conch.
"And I was frightened and started to call out for Ralph and then I saw something
moving among the trees, something big and horrid."
He paused, half-frightened by the recollection yet proud of the sensation he was
creating.
"That was a nightmare," said Ralph. "He was walking in his sleep."
The assembly murmured in subdued agreement.
The littlun shook his head stubbornly.
"I was asleep when the twisty things were fighting and when they went away I was
awake, and I saw something big and horrid moving in the trees."
Ralph held out his hands for the conch and the littlun sat down.
"You were asleep. There wasn't anyone there. How could anyone be wandering about
in the forest at night? Was anyone? Did anyone go out?"
There was a long pause while the assembly grinned at the thought of anyone going out
in the darkness. Then Simon stood up and Ralph looked at him in astonishment.
"You! What were you mucking about in the dark for?"
Simon grabbed the conch convulsively.
"I wanted--to go to a place--a place I know."
"What place?"
"Just a place I know. A place in the jungle." He hesitated.
Jack settled the question for them with that contempt in his voice that could sound so
funny and so final.
"He was taken short."
With a feeling of humiliation on Simon's behalf, Ralph took back the conch, looking
Simon sternly in the face as he did so.
"Well, don't do it again. Understand? Not at night. There's enough silly talk about
beasts, without the littluns seeing you gliding about like a--"
The derisive laughter that rose had fear in it and condemnation. Simon opened his
mouth to speak but Ralph had the conch, so he backed to his seat.
When the assembly was silent Ralph turned to Piggy.
"Well, Piggy?"
"There was another one. Him."
The littluns pushed Percival forward, then left him by himself. He stood knee-deep in
the central grass, looking at his hidden feet, trying to pretend he was in a tent. Ralph
remembered another small boy who had stood like this and he flinched away from thememory. He had pushed the thought down and out of sight, where only some positive
reminder like this could bring it to the surface. There had been no further numberings of the
littluns, partly because there was no means of insuring that all of them were accounted for and
partly because Ralph knew the answer to at least one question Piggy had asked on the
mountaintop. There were little boys, fair, dark, freckled, and all dirty, but their faces were all
dreadfully free of major blemishes. No one had seen the mulberry-colored birthmark again.
But that time Piggy had coaxed and bullied. Tacitly admitting that he remembered the
unmentionable, Ralph nodded to Piggy.
"Go on. Ask him."
Piggy knelt, holding the conch.
"Now then. What's your name?"
The small boy twisted away into his tent. Piggy turned helplessly to Ralph, who spoke
sharply.
"What's your name?"
Tormented by the silence and the refusal the assembly broke into a chant.
"What's your name? What's your name?"
"Quiet!"
Ralph peered at the child in the twilight.
"Now tell us. What's your name?"
"Percival Wemys Madison. The Vicarage, Harcourt St. Anthony, Hants, telephone,
telephone, tele--"
As if this information was rooted far down in the springs of sorrow, the littlun wept.
His face puckered, the tears leapt from his eyes, his mouth opened till they could see a square
black hole. At first he was a silent effigy of sorrow; but then the lamentation rose out of him,
loud and sustained as the conch.
"Shut up, you! Shut up!"
Percival Wemys Madison would not shut up. A spring had been tapped, far beyond the
reach of authority or even physical intimidation. The crying went on, breath after breath, and
seemed to sustain him upright as if he were nailed to it.
"Shut up! Shut up!"
For now the littluns were no longer silent. They were reminded of their personal
sorrows; and perhaps felt themselves to share in a sorrow that was universal. They began to cry
in sympathy, two of them almost as loud as Percival.
Maurice saved them. He cried out.
"Look at me!"He pretended to fall over. He rubbed his rump and sat on the twister so that he fell in
the grass. He downed badly; but Percival and the others noticed and sniffed and laughed.
Presently they were all laughing so absurdly that the biguns joined in.
Jack was the first to make himself heard. He had not got the conch and thus spoke
against the rules; but nobody minded.
"And what about the beast?"
Something strange was happening to Percival. He yawned and staggered, so that Jack
seized and shook him.
"Where does the beast live?"
Percival sagged in Jack's grip.
"That's a clever beast," said Piggy, jeering, "if it can hide on this island."
"Jack's been everywhere--"
"Where could a beast live?"
"Beast my foot!"
Percival muttered something and the assembly laughed again. Ralph leaned forward.
"What does he say?"
Jack listened to Percival's answer and then let go of him. Percival, released, surrounded
by the comfortable presence of humans, fell in the long grass and went to sleep.
Jack cleared his throat, then reported casually.
"He says the beast comes out of the sea."
The last laugh died away. Ralph turned involuntarily, a black, humped figure against the
lagoon. The assembly looked with him, considered the vast stretches of water, the high sea
beyond, unknown indigo of infinite possibility, heard silently the sough and whisper from the
reef.
Maurice spoke, so loudly that they jumped.
"Daddy said they haven't found all the animals in the sea yet."
Argument started again. Ralph held out the glimmering conch and Maurice took it
obediently. The meeting subsided.
"I mean when Jack says you can be frightened because people are frightened anyway
that's all right. But when he says there's only pigs on this island I expect he's right but he
doesn't know, not really, not certainly I mean--" Maurice took a breath. "My daddy says
there's things, what d'you call'em that make ink--squids--that are hundreds of yards long and
eat whales whole." He paused again and laughed gaily. "I don't believe in the beast of course.
As Piggy says, life's scientific, but we don't know, do we? Not certainly, I mean--"
Someone shouted.
"A squid couldn't come up out of the water!""Could!"
"Couldn't!"
In a moment the platform was full of arguing, gesticulating shadows. To Ralph, seated,
this seemed the breaking up of sanity. Fear, beasts, no general agreement that the fire was allimportant: and when one tried to get the thing straight the argument sheered off, bringing up
fresh, unpleasant matter.
He could see a whiteness in the gloom near him so he grabbed it from Maurice and
blew as loudly as he could. The assembly was shocked into silence. Simon was close to him,
laying hands on the conch. Simon felt a perilous necessity to speak; but to speak in assembly
was a terrible thing to him.
"Maybe," he said hesitantly, "maybe there is a beast."
The assembly cried out savagely and Ralph stood up in amazement.
"You, Simon? You believe in this?"
"I don't know," said Simon. His heartbeats were choking him. "But. . . ."
The storm broke.
"Sit down!"
"Shut up!"
"Take the conch!"
"Sod you!"
"Shut up!"
Ralph shouted.
"Hear him! He's got the conch!"
"What I mean is . . . maybe it's only us."
"Nuts!"
That was from Piggy, shocked out of decorum. Simon went on.
"We could be sort of. . . ."
Simon became inarticulate in his effort to express mankind's essential illness.
Inspiration came to him.
"What's the dirtiest thing there is?"
As an answer Jack dropped into the uncomprehending silence that followed it the one
crude expressive syllable. Release was immense. Those littluns who had climbed back on the
twister fell off again and did not mind. The hunters were screaming with delight.
Simon's effort fell about him in ruins; the laughter beat him cruelly and he shrank away
defenseless to his seat.
At last the assembly was silent again. Someone spoke out of turn.
"Maybe he means it's some sort of ghost."Ralph lifted the conch and peered into the gloom. The lightest thing was the pale
beach. Surely the littluns were nearer? Yes--there was no doubt about it, they were huddled
into a tight knot of bodies in the central grass. A flurry of wind made the palms talk and the
noise seemed very loud now that darkness and silence made it so noticeable. Two grey trunks
rubbed each other with an evil speaking that no one had noticed by day.
Piggy took the conch out of his hands. His voice was indignant.
"I don't believe in no ghosts--ever!"
Jack was up too, unaccountably angry.
"Who cares what you believe--Fatty!"
"I got the conch!"
There was the sound of a brief tussle and the conch moved to and fro.
"You gimme the conch back!"
Ralph pushed between them and got a thump on the chest. He wrestled the conch
from someone and sat down breathlessly.
"There's too much talk about ghosts. We ought to have left all this for daylight."
A hushed and anonymous voice broke in.
"Perhaps that's what the beast is--a ghost."
The assembly was shaken as by a wind.
"There's too much talking out of turn," Ralph said, "because we can't have proper
assemblies if you don't stick to the rules."
He stopped again. The careful plan of this assembly had broken down.
"What d'you want me to say then? I was wrong to call this assembly so late. We'll have
a vote on them; on ghosts I mean; and then go to the shelters because we're all tired. No--Jack
is it?--wait a minute. I'll say here and now that I don't believe in ghosts. Or I don't think I do.
But I don't like the thought of them. Not now that is, in the dark. But we were going to
decide what's what."
He raised the conch for a moment.
"Very well then. I suppose what's what is whether there are ghosts or not--"
He thought for a moment, formulating the question.
"Who thinks there may be ghosts?"
For a long time there was silence and no apparent movement. Then Ralph peered into
the gloom and made out the hands. He spoke flatly.
"I see."
The world, that understandable and lawful world, was slipping away. Once there was
this and that; and now-- and the ship had gone.
The conch was snatched from his hands and Piggy's voice shrilled."I didn't vote for no ghosts!"
He whirled round on the assembly.
"Remember that, all of you!"
They heard him stamp.
"What are we? Humans? Or animals? Or savages? What's grownups going to think?
Going off--hunting pigs--letting fires out--and now!"
A shadow fronted him tempestuously.
"You shut up, you fat slug!"
There was a moment's struggle and the glimmering conch jigged up and down. Ralph
leapt to his feet.
"Jack! Jack! You haven't got the conch! Let him speak."
Jack's face swam near him.
"And you shut up! Who are you, anyway? Sitting there telling people what to do. You
can't hunt, you can't sing--"
"I'm chief. I was chosen."
"Why should choosing make any difference? Just giving orders that don't make any
sense--"
"Piggy's got the conch."
"That's right--favor Piggy as you always do--"
"Jack!"
Jack's voice sounded in bitter mimicry.
"Jack! Jack!"
"The rules!" shouted Ralph. "You're breaking the rules!"
"Who cares?"
Ralph summoned his wits.
"Because the rules are the only thing we've got!"
But Jack was shouting against him.
"Bollocks to the rules! We're strong--we hunt! If there's a beast, we'll hunt it down!
We'll close in and beat and beat and beat--!"
He gave a wild whoop and leapt down to the pale sand. At once the platform was full of
noise and excitement, scramblings, screams and laughter. The assembly shredded away and
became a discursive and random scatter from the palms to the water and away along the
beach, beyond night-sight. Ralph found his cheek touching the conch and took it from Piggy.
"What's grownups going to say?" cried Piggy again. "Look at 'em!"
The sound of mock hunting, hysterical laughter and real terror came from the beach.
"Blow the conch, Ralph."Piggy was so close that Ralph could see the glint of his one glass.
"There's the fire. Can't they see?"
"You got to be tough now. Make 'em do what you want."
Ralph answered in the cautious voice of one who rehearses a theorem.
"If I blow the conch and they don't come back; then we've had it. We shan't keep the
fire going. We'll be like animals. We'll never be rescued."
"If you don't blow, we'll soon be animals anyway. I can't see what they're doing but I
can hear."
The dispersed figures had come together on the sand and were a dense black mass that
revolved. They were chanting something and littluns that had had enough were staggering
away, howling. Ralph raised the conch to his lips and then lowered it.
"The trouble is: Are there ghosts, Piggy? Or beasts?"
"Course there aren't."
"Why not?"
"'Cos things wouldn't make sense. Houses an' streets, an'--TV--they wouldn't work."
The dancing, chanting boys had worked themselves away till their sound was nothing
but a wordless rhythm.
"But s'pose they don't make sense? Not here, on this island? Supposing things are
watching us and waiting?"
Ralph shuddered violently and moved closer to Piggy, so that they bumped
frighteningly.
"You stop talking like that! We got enough trouble, Ralph, an' I've had as much as I
can stand. If there is ghosts--''
"I ought to give up being chief. Hear 'em."
"Oh lord! Oh no!"
Piggy gripped Ralph's arm.
"If Jack was chief he'd have all hunting and no fire. We'd be here till we died."
His voice ran up to a squeak.
"Who's that sitting there?"
"Me. Simon."
"Fat lot of good we are," said Ralph. "Three blind mice. I'll give up."
"If you give up," said Piggy, in an appalled whisper, "what 'ud happen to me?"
"Nothing."
"He hates me. I dunno why. If he could do what he wanted--you're all right, he respects
you. Besides--you'd hit him."
"You were having a nice fight with him just now.""I had the conch," said Piggy simply. "I had a right to speak."
Simon stirred in the dark.
"Go on being chief."
"You shut up, young Simon! Why couldn't you say there wasn't a beast?"
"I'm scared of him," said Piggy, "and that's why I know him. If you're scared of
someone you hate him but you can't stop thinking about him. You kid yourself he's all right
really, an' then when you see him again; it's like asthma an' you can't breathe. I tell you what.
He hates you too, Ralph--"
"Me? Why me?"
"I dunno. You got him over the fire; an' you're chief an' he isn't."
"But he's, he's, Jack Merridew!"
"I been in bed so much I done some thinking. I know about people. I know about me.
And him. He can't hurt you: but if you stand out of the way he'd hurt the next thing. And
that's me."
"Piggy's right, Ralph. There's you and Jack. Go on being chief."
"We're all drifting and things are going rotten. At home there was always a grownup.
Please, sir, please, miss; and then you got an answer. How I wish!"
"I wish my auntie was here."
"I wish my father. . . Oh, what's the use?"
"Keep the fire going."
The dance was over and the hunters were going back to the shelters.
"Grownups know things," said Piggy. "They ain't afraid of the dark. They'd meet and
have tea and discuss. Then things 'ud be all right--"
"They wouldn't set fire to the island. Or lose--"
"They'd build a ship--"
The three boys stood in the darkness, striving unsuccessfully to convey the majesty of
adult life.
"They wouldn't quarrel--"
"Or break my specs--"
"Or talk about a beast--"
"If only they could get a message to us," cried Ralph desperately. "If only they could
send us something grownup. . . a sign or something."
A thin wail out of the darkness chilled them and set them grabbing for each other.
Then the wail rose, remote and unearthly,' and turned to an inarticulate gibbering. Percival
Wemys Madison, of the Vicarage, Harcourt St. Anthony, lying in the long grass, was living
through circumstances in which the incantation of his address was powerless to help him.CHAPTER SIX
Beast from Air
There was no light left save that of the stars. When they had understood what made
this ghostly noise and Percival was quiet again, Ralph and Simon picked him up unhandily and
carried him to a shelter. Piggy hung about near for all his brave words, and the three bigger
boys went together to the next shelter. They lay restlessly and noisily among the dry leaves,
watching the patch of stars that was the opening toward the lagoon. Sometimes a littlun cried
out from the other shelters and once a bigun spoke in the dark. Then they too fell asleep.
A sliver of moon rose over the horizon, hardly large enough to make a path of light
even when it sat right down on the water; but there were other lights in the sky, that moved
fast, winked, or went out, though not even a faint popping came down from the battle fought
at ten miles' height. But a sign came down from the world of grownups, though at the time
there was no child awake to read it. There was a sudden bright explosion and corkscrew trail
across the sky; then darkness again and stars. There was a speck above the island, a figure
dropping swiftly beneath a parachute, a figure that hung with dangling limbs. The changing
winds of various altitudes took the figure where they would. Then, three miles up, the wind
steadied and bore it in a descending curve round the sky and swept it in a great slant across the
reef and the lagoon toward the mountain. The figure fell and crumpled among the blue flowers
of the mountain-side, but now there was a gentle breeze at this height too and the parachute
flopped and banged and pulled. So the figure, with feet that dragged behind it, slid up the
mountain. Yard by yard, puff by puff, the breeze hauled the figure through the blue flowers,
over the boulders and red stones, till it lay huddled among the shattered rocks of the
mountain-top. Here the breeze was fitful and allowed the strings of the parachute to tangle
and festoon; and the figure sat, its helmeted head between its knees, held by a complication of
lines. When the breeze blew, the lines would strain taut and some accident of this pull lifted
the head and chest upright so that the figure seemed to peer across the brow of the mountain.
Then, each time the wind dropped, the lines would slacken and the figure bow forward again,
sinking its head between its knees. So as the stars moved across the sky, the figure sat on the
mountain-top and bowed and sank and bowed again.
In the darkness of early morning there were noises by a rock a little way down the side
of the mountain. Two boys rolled out a pile of brushwood and dead leaves, two dim shadows
talking sleepily to each other. They were the twins, on duty at the fire. In theory one should
have been asleep and one on watch. But they could never manage to do things sensibly if that
meant acting independently, and since staying awake all night was impossible, they had both
gone to sleep. Now they approached the darker smudge that had been the signal fire, yawning,rubbing their eyes, treading with practiced feet. When they reached it they stopped yawning,
and one ran quickly back for brushwood and leaves.
The other knelt down.
"I believe it's out."
He fiddled with the sticks that were pushed into his hands.
"No."
He lay down and put his lips close to the smudge and blew soffly. His face appeared, lit
redly. He stopped blowing for a moment.
"Sam--give us--"
"--tinder wood."
Eric bent down and blew softly again till the patch was bright. Sam poked the piece of
tinder wood into the hot spot, then a branch. The glow increased and the branch took fire.
Sam piled on more branches.
"Don't burn the lot," said Eric, "you're putting on too much."
"Let's warm up."
"We'll only have to fetch more wood."
"I'm cold."
"So'm I."
"Besides, it's--"
"--dark. All right, then."
Eric squatted back and watched Sam make up the fire. He built a little tent of dead
wood and the fire was safely alight.
"That was near."
"He'd have been--"
"Waxy."
"Huh."
For a few moments the twins watched the fire in silence. Then Eric sniggered.
"Wasn't he waxy?"
"About the--"
"Fire and the pig."
"Lucky he went for Jack, 'stead of us."
"Huh. Remember old Waxy at school?"
"'Boy--you-are-driving-me-slowly-insane!'"
The twins shared their identical laughter, then remembered the darkness and other
things and glanced round uneasily. The flames, busy about the tent, drew their eyes back again.
Eric watched the scurrying woodlice that were so frantically unable to avoid the flames, andthought of the first fire--just down there, on the steeper side of the mountain, where now was
complete darkness. He did not like to remember it, and looked away at the mountain-top.
Warmth radiated now, and beat pleasantly on them. Sam amused himself by fitting
branches into the fire as closely as possible. Eric spread out his hands, searching for the
distance at which the heat was just bearable. Idly looking beyond the fire, he resettled the
scattered rocks from their flat shadows into daylight contours. Just there was the big rock, and
the three stones there, that split rock, and there beyond was a gap--just there--
"Sam."
"Huh?"
"Nothing."
The flames were mastering the branches, the bark was curling and falling away, the
wood exploding. The tent fell inwards and flung a wide circle of light over the mountain-top.
"Sam--"
"Huh?"
"Sam! Sam!"
Sam looked at Eric irritably. The intensity of Eric's gaze made the direction in which
he looked terrible, for Sam had his back to it. He scrambled round the fire, squatted by Eric,
and looked to see. They became motionless, gripped in each other's arms, four unwinking eyes
aimed and two mouths open.
Far beneath them, the trees of the forest sighed, then roared. The hair on their
foreheads fluttered and flames blew out sideways from the fire. Fifteen yards away from them
came the plopping noise of fabric blown open.
Neither of the boys screamed but the grip of their arms tightened and their mouths
grew peaked. For perhaps ten seconds they crouched like that while the flailing fire sent
smoke and sparks and waves of inconstant light over the top of the mountain.
Then as though they had but one terrified mind between them they scrambled away
over the rocks and fled.
Ralph was dreaming. He had fallen asleep after what seemed hours of tossing and
turning noisily among the dry leaves. Even the sounds of nightmare from the other shelters no
longer reached him, for he was back to where he came from, feeding the ponies with sugar
over the garden wall. Then someone was shaking his arm, telling him that it was time for tea.
"Ralph! Wake up!"
The leaves were roaring like the sea.
"Ralph, wake up!"
"What's the matter?""We saw--"
"--the beast--"
"--plain!"
"Who are you? The twins?"
"We saw the beast--"
"Quiet. Piggy!"
The leaves were roaring still. Piggy bumped into him and a twin grabbed him as he
made for the oblong of paling stars.
"You can't go out--it's horrible!"
"Piggy--where are the spears?"
"I can hear the--"
"Quiet then. Lie still."
They lay there listening, at first with doubt but then with terror to the description the
twins breathed at them between bouts of extreme silence. Soon the darkness was full of claws,
full of the awful unknown and menace. An interminable dawn faded the stars out, and at last
light, sad and grey, filtered into the shelter. They began to stir though still the world outside
the shelter was impossibly dangerous. The maze of the darkness sorted into near and far, and
at the high point of the sky the cloudlets were warmed with color. A single sea bird flapped
upwards with a hoarse cry that was echoed presently, and something squawked in the forest.
Now streaks of cloud near the horizon began to glow rosily, and the feathery tops of the palms
were green.
Ralph knelt in the entrance to the shelter and peered cautiously round him.
"Sam 'n Eric. Call them to an assembly. Quietly. Go on."
The twins, holding tremulously to each other, dared the few yards to the next shelter
and spread the dreadful news. Ralph stood up and walked for the sake of dignity, though with
his back pricking, to the platform. Piggy and Simon followed him and the other boys came
sneaking after.
Ralph took the conch from where it lay on the polished seat and held it to his lips; but
then he hesitated and did not blow. He held the shell up instead and showed it to them and
they understood.
The rays of the sun that were fanning upwards from below the horizon swung
downwards to eye-level. Ralph looked for a moment at the growing slice of gold that lit them
from the right hand and seemed to make speech possible. The circle of boys before him
bristled with hunting spears.
He handed the conch to Eric, the nearest of the twins.
"We've seen the beast with our own eyes. No--we weren't asleep--"Sam took up the story. By custom now one conch did for both twins, for their
substantial unity was recognized.
"It was furry. There was something moving behind its head--wings. The beast moved
too--"
"That was awful. It kind of sat up--"
"The fire was bright--"
"We'd just made it up--"
"--more sticks on--"
"There were eyes--"
"Teeth--"
"Claws--"
"We ran as fast as we could--"
"Bashed into things--"
"The beast followed us--"
"I saw it slinking behind the trees--"
"Nearly touched me--"
Ralph pointed fearfully at Eric's face, which was striped with scars where the bushes
had torn him.
"How did you do that?"
Eric felt his face.
"I'm all rough. Am I bleeding?"
The circle of boys shrank away in horror. Johnny, yawning still, burst into noisy tears
and was slapped by Bill till he choked on them. The bright morning was full of threats and the
circle began to change. It faced out, rather than in, and the spears of sharpened wood were
like a fence. Jack called them back to the center.
"This'll be a real hunt! Who'll come?"
Ralph moved impatiently.
"These spears are made of wood. Don't be silly."
Jack sneered at him.
"Frightened?"
"'Course I'm frightened. Who wouldn't be?"
He turned to the twins, yearning but hopeless.
"I suppose you aren't pulling our legs?"
The reply was too emphatic for anyone to doubt them.
Piggy took the conch.
"Couldn't we--kind of--stay here? Maybe the beast won't come near us."But for the sense of something watching them, Ralph would have shouted at him.
"Stay here? And be cramped into this bit of the island, always on the lookout? How
should we get our food? And what about the fire?"
"Let's be moving," said Jack relentlessly, "we're wasting time."
"No we're not. What about the littluns?"
"Sucks to the littluns!"
"Someone's got to look after them."
"Nobody has so far."
"There was no need! Now there is. Piggy'll look after them."
"That's right. Keep Piggy out of danger."
"Have some sense. What can Piggy do with only one eye?"
The rest of the boys were looking from Jack to Ralph, curiously.
"And another thing. You can't have an ordinary hunt because the beast doesn't leave
tracks. If it did you'd have seen them. For all we know, the beast may swing through the trees
like what's its name."
They nodded.
"So we've got to think."
Piggy took off his damaged glasses and cleaned the remaining lens.
"How about us, Ralph?"
"You haven't got the conch. Here."
"I mean--how about us? Suppose the beast comes when you're all away. I can't see
proper, and if I get scared--"
Jack broke in, contemptuously.
"You're always scared."
"I got the conch--"
"Conch! Conch!" shouted Jack. "We don't need the conch any more. We know who
ought to say things. What good did Simon do speaking, or Bill, or Walter? It's time some
people knew they've got to keep quiet and leave deciding things to the rest of us."
Ralph could no longer ignore his speech. The blood was hot in his cheeks.
"You haven't got the conch," he said. "Sit down."
Jack's face went so white that the freckles showed as clear, brown flecks. He licked his
lips and remained standing.
"This is a hunter's job."
The rest of the boys watched intently. Piggy, finding himself uncomfortably embroiled,
slid the conch to Ralph's knees and sat down. The silence grew oppressive and Piggy held his
breath."This is more than a hunter's job," said Ralph at last, "because you can't track the beast.
And don't you want to be rescued?"
He turned to the assembly.
"Don't you all want to be rescued?"
He looked back at Jack.
"I said before, the fire is the main thing. Now the fire must be out--"
The old exasperation saved him and gave him the energy to attack.
"Hasn't anyone got any sense? We've got to relight that fire. You never thought of
that, Jack, did you? Or don't any of you want to be rescued?"
Yes, they wanted to be rescued, there was no doubt about that; and with a violent
swing to Ralph's side, the crisis passed. Piggy let out his breath with a gasp, reached for it
again and failed. He lay against a log, his mouth gaping, blue shadows creeping round his lips.
Nobody minded him.
"Now think, Jack. Is there anywhere on the island you haven't been?"
Unwillingly Jack answered.
"There's only--but of course! You remember? The tail-end part, where the rocks are all
piled up. I've been near there. The rock makes a sort of bridge. There's only one way up."
"And the thing might live there."
All the assembly talked at once.
"Quite! All right. That's where we'll look. If the beast isn't there we'll go up the
mountain and look; and light the fire."
"Let's go."
"We'll eat first. Then go." Ralph paused. "We'd better take spears."
After they had eaten, Ralph and the biguns set out along the beach. They left Piggy
propped up on the platform. This day promised, like the others, to be a sunbath under a blue
dome. The beach stretched away before them in a gentle curve till perspective drew it into one
with the forest; for the day was not advanced enough to be obscured by the shifting veils of
mirage. Under Ralph's direction, they picked up a careful way along the palm terrace, rather
than dare the hot sand down by the water. He let Jack lead the way; and Jack trod with
theatrical caution though they could have seen an enemy twenty yards away. Ralph walked in
the rear, thankful to have escaped responsibility for a time.
Simon, walking in front of Ralph, felt a flicker of incredulity--a beast with claws that
scratched, that sat on a mountain-top, that left no tracks and yet was not fast enough to catch
Samneric. However Simon thought of the beast, there rose before his inward sight the picture
of a human at once heroic and sick.He sighed. Other people could stand up and speak to an assembly, apparently, without
that dreadful feeling of the pressure of personality; could say what they would as though they
were speaking to only one person. He stepped aside and looked back. Ralph was coming along,
holding his spear over his shoulder. Diffidently, Simon allowed his pace to slacken until he was
walking side by side with Ralph and looking up at him through the coarse black hair that now
fell to his eyes. Ralph glanced sideways, smiled constrainedly as though he had forgotten that
Simon had made a fool of himself, then looked away again at nothing. For a moment or two
Simon was happy to be accepted and then he ceased to think about himself. When he bashed
into a tree Ralph looked sideways impatiently and Robert sniggered. Simon reeled and a white
spot on his forehead turned red and trickled. Ralph dismissed Simon and returned to his
personal hell. They would reach the castle some time; and the chief would have to go forward.
Jack came trotting back. "We're in sight now."
"All right. We'll get as close as we can."
He followed Jack toward the castle where the ground rose slightly. On their left was an
impenetrable tangle of creepers and trees.
"Why couldn't there be something in that?"
"Because you can see. Nothing goes in or out."
"What about the castle then?"
"Look."
Ralph parted the screen of grass and looked out. There were only a few more yards of
stony ground and then the two sides of the island came almost together so that one expected a
peak of headland. But instead of this a narrow ledge of rock, a few yards wide and perhaps
fifteen long, continued the island out into the sea. There lay another of those pieces of pink
squareness that underlay the structure of the island. This side of the castle, perhaps a hundred
feet high, was the pink bastion they had seen from the mountain-top. The rock of the cliff was
split and the top littered with great lumps that seemed to totter.
Behind Ralph the tall grass had filled with silent hunters. Ralph looked at Jack.
"You're a hunter."
Jack went red.
"I know. All right."
Something deep in Ralph spoke for him.
"I'm chief. I'll go. Don't argue."
He turned to the others.
"You. Hide here. Wait for me."
He found his voice tended either to disappear or to come out too loud. He looked at
Jack."Do you--think?"
Jack muttered.
"I've been all over. It must be here."
"I see."
Simon mumbled confusedly: "I don't believe in the beast."
Ralph answered him politely, as if agreeing about the weather.
"No. I suppose not."
His mouth was tight and pale. He put back his hair very slowly.
"Well. So long."
He forced his feet to move until they had carried him out on to the neck of land.
He was surrounded on all sides by chasms of empty air. There was nowhere to hide,
even if one did not have to go on. He paused on the narrow neck and looked down. Soon, in a
matter of centuries, the sea would make an island of the castle. On the right hand was the
lagoon, troubled by the open sea; and on the left-- Ralph shuddered. The lagoon had protected
them from the Pacific: and for some reason only Jack had gone right down to the water on the
other side. Now he saw the landsman's view of the swell and it seemed like the breathing of
some stupendous creature. Slowly the waters sank among the rocks, revealing pink tables of
granite, strange growths of coral, polyp, and weed. Down, down, the waters went, whispering
like the wind among the heads of the forest. There was one flat rock there, spread like a table,
and the waters sucking down on the four weedy sides made them seem like cliffs. Then the
sleeping leviathan breathed out, the waters rose, the weed streamed, and the water boiled over
the table rock with a roar. There was no sense of the passage of waves; only this minute-long
fall and rise and fall.
Ralph turned away to the red cliff. They were waiting behind him in the long grass,
waiting to see what he would do. He noticed that the sweat in his palm was cool now; realized
with surprise that he did not really expect to meet any beast and didn't know what he would
do about it if he did.
He saw that he could climb the cliff but this was not necessary. The squareness of the
rock allowed a sort of plinth round it, so that to the right, over the lagoon, one could inch
along a ledge and turn the corner out of sight. It was easy going, and soon he was peering
round the rock.
Nothing but what you might expect: pink, tumbled boulders with guano layered on
them like icing; and a steep slope up to the shattered rocks that crowned the bastion.
A sound behind him made him turn. Jack was edging along the ledge.
"Couldn't let you do it on your own."Ralph said nothing. He led the way over the rocks, inspected a sort of half-cave that
held nothing more terrible than a clutch of rotten eggs, and at last sat down, looking round
him and tapping the rock with the butt of his spear.
Jack was excited.
"What a place for a fort!"
A column of spray wetted them.
"No fresh water."
"What's that then?"
There was indeed a long green smudge half-way up the rock. They climbed up and
tasted the trickle of water.
"You could keep a coconut shell there, filling all the time."
"Not me. This is a rotten place."
Side by side they scaled the last height to where the diminishing pile was crowned by
the last broken rock. Jack struck the near one with his fist and it grated slightly.
"Do you remember--?"
Consciousness of the bad times in between came to them both. Jack talked quickly.
"Shove a palm trunk under that and if an enemy came-- look!"
A hundred feet below them was the narrow causeway, then the stony ground, then the
grass dotted with heads, and behind that the forest.
"One heave," cried Jack, exulting, "and--wheee--!"
He made a sweeping movement with his hand. Ralph looked toward the mountain.
"What's the matter?"
Ralph turned.
"Why?"
"You were looking--I don't know why."
"There's no signal now. Nothing to show."
"You're nuts on the signal."
The taut blue horizon encircled them, broken only by the mountain-top.
"That's all we've got."
He leaned his spear against the rocking stone and pushed back two handfuls of hair.
"We'll have to go back and climb the mountain. That's where they saw the beast."
"The beast won't be there."
"What else can we do?"
The others, waiting in the grass, saw Jack and Ralph unharmed and broke cover into
the sunlight. They forgot the beast in the excitement of exploration. They swarmed across the
bridge and soon were climbing and shouting. Ralph stood now, one hand against an enormousred block, a block large as a mill wheel that had been split off and hung, tottering. Somberly he
watched the mountain. He clenched his fist and beat hammer-wise on the red wall at his right.
His lips were tightly compressed and his eyes yearned beneath the fringe of hair.
"Smoke."
He sucked his bruised fist.
"Jack! Come on."
But Jack was not there. A knot of boys, making a great noise that he had not noticed,
were heaving and pushing at a rock. As he turned, the base cracked and the whole mass
toppled into the sea so that a thunderous plume of spray leapt half-way up the cliff.
"Stop it! Stop it!"
His voice struck a silence among them.
"Smoke."
A strange thing happened in his head. Something flittered there in front of his mind
like a bat's wing, obscuring his idea.
"Smoke."
At once the ideas were back, and the anger.
"We want smoke. And you go wasting your time. You roll rocks."
Roger shouted.
"We've got plenty of time!"
Ralph shook his head.
"We'll go to the mountain."
The clamor broke out. Some of the boys wanted to go back to the beach. Some wanted
to roll more rocks. The sun was bright and danger had faded with the darkness.
"Jack. The beast might be on the other side. You can lead again. You've been."
"We could go by the shore. There's fruit."
Bill came up to Ralph.
"Why can't we stay here for a bit?"
"That's right.''
"Let's have a fort."
"There's no food here," said Ralph, "and no shelter. Not much fresh water."
"This would make a wizard fort."
"We can roll rocks--"
"Right onto the bridge--"
"I say we'll go on!" shouted Ralph furiously. "We've got to make certain. We'll go
now."
"Let's stay here--""Back to the shelter--"
"I'm tired--"
"No!"
Ralph struck the skin off his knuckles. They did not seem to hurt.
"I'm chief. We've got to make certain. Can't you see the mountain? There's no signal
showing. There may be a ship out there. Are you all off your rockers?"
Mutinously, the boys fell silent or muttering.
Jack led the way down the rock and across the bridge.
CHAPTER SEVEN
Shadows and Tall Trees
The pig-run kept close to the jumble of rocks that lay down by the water on the other
side and Ralph was content to follow Jack along it. If you could shut your ears to the slow suck
down of the sea and boil of the return, if you could forget how dun and unvisited were the
ferny coverts on either side, then there was a chance that you might put the beast out of mind
and dream for a while. The sun had swung over the vertical and the afternoon heat was closing
in on the island. Ralph passed a message forward to Jack and when they next came to fruit the
whole party stopped and ate.
Sitting, Ralph was aware of the heat for the first time that day. He pulled distastefully
at his grey shirt and wondered whether he might undertake the adventure of washing it.
Sitting under what seemed an unusual heat, even for this island, Ralph planned his toilet. He
would like to have a pair of scissors and cut this hair--he flung the mass back--cut this filthy
hair right back to half an inch. He would like to have a bath, a proper wallow with soap. He
passed his tongue experimentally over his teeth and decided that a toothbrush would come in
handy too. Then there were his nails--
Ralph turned his hand over and examined them. They were bitten down to the quick
though he could not remember when he had restarted this habit nor any time when he
indulged it.
"Be sucking my thumb next--"
He looked round, furtively. Apparently no one had heard. The hunters sat, stuffing
themselves with this easy meal, trying to convince themselves that they got sufficient kick out
of bananas and that other olive-grey, jelly-like fruit. With the memory of his sometime clean
self as a standard, Ralph looked them over. They were dirty, not with the spectacular dirt of
boys who have fallen into mud or been brought down hard on a rainy day. Not one of themwas an obvious subject for a shower, and yet--hair, much too long, tangled here and there,
knotted round a dead leaf or a twig; faces cleaned fairly well by the process of eating and
sweating but marked in the less accessible angles with a kind of shadow; clothes, worn away,
stiff like his own with sweat, put on, not for decorum or comfort but out of custom; the skin
of the body, scurfy with brine--
He discovered with a little fall of the heart that these were the conditions he took as
normal now and that he did not mind. He sighed and pushed away the stalk from which he
had stripped the fruit. Already the hunters were stealing away to do their business in the
woods or down by the rocks. He turned and looked out to sea.
Here, on the other side of the island, the view was utterly different. The filmy
enchantments of mirage could not endure the cold ocean water and the horizon was hard,
clipped blue. Ralph wandered down to the rocks. Down here, almost on a level with the sea,
you could follow with your eye the ceaseless, bulging passage of the deep sea waves. They were
miles wide, apparently not breakers or the banked ridges of shallow water. They traveled the
length of the island with an air of disregarding it and being set on other business; they were
less a progress than a momentous rise and fall of the whole ocean. Now the sea would suck
down, making cascades and waterfalls of retreating water, would sink past the rocks and
plaster down the seaweed like shining hair: then, pausing, gather and rise with a roar,
irresistibly swelling over point and outcrop, climbing the little cliff, sending at last an arm of
surf up a gully to end a yard or so from him in fingers of spray.
Wave after wave, Ralph followed the rise and fall until something of the remoteness of
the sea numbed his brain. Then gradually the almost infinite size of this water forced itself on
his attention. This was the divider, the barrier. On the other side of the island, swathed at
midday with mirage, defended by the shield of the quiet lagoon, one might dream of rescue;
but here, faced by the brute obtuseness of the ocean, the miles of division, one was clamped
down, one was helpless, one was condemned, one was--
Simon was speaking almost in his ear. Ralph found that he had rock painfully gripped
in both hands, found his body arched, the muscles of his neck stiff, his mouth strained open.
"You'll get back to where you came from."
Simon nodded as he spoke. He was kneeling on one knee, looking down from a higher
rock which he held with both hands; his other leg stretched down to Ralph's level.
Ralph was puzzled and searched Simon's face for a clue.
"It's so big, I mean--"
Simon nodded.
"All the same. You'll get back all right. I think so, anyway."Some of the strain had gone from Ralph's body. He glanced at the sea and then smiled
bitterly at Simon.
"Got a ship in your pocket?"
Simon grinned and shook his head.
"How do you know, then?"
When Simon was still silent Ralph said curtly, "You're batty."
Simon shook his head violently till the coarse black hair flew backwards and forwards
across his face.
"No, I'm not. I just _think you'll get back all right._"
For a moment nothing more was said. And then they suddenly smiled at each other.
Roger called from the coverts.
"Come and see!"
The ground was turned over near the pig-run and there were droppings that steamed.
Jack bent down to them as though he loved them.
"Ralph--we need meat even if we are hunting the other thing."
"If you mean going the right way, we'll hunt."
They set off again, the hunters bunched a little by fear of the mentioned beast, while
Jack quested ahead. They went more slowly than Ralph had bargained for; yet in a way he was
glad to loiter, cradling his spear. Jack came up against some emergency of his craft and soon
the procession stopped. Ralph leaned against a tree and at once the daydreams came swarming
up. Jack was in charge of the hunt and there would be time to get to the mountain--
Once, following his father from Chatham to Devonport, they had lived in a cottage on
the edge of the moors. In the succession of houses that Ralph had known, this one stood out
with particular clarity because after that house he had been sent away to school. Mummy had
still been with them and Daddy had come home every day. Wild ponies came to the stone wall
at the bottom of the garden, and it had snowed. Just behind the cottage there was a sort of
shed and you could lie up there, watching the flakes swirl past. You could see the damp spot
where each flake died, then you could mark the first flake that lay down without melting and
watch, the whole ground turn white. You could go indoors when you were cold and look out
of the window, past the bright copper kettle and the plate with the little blue men.
When you went to bed there was a bowl of cornflakes with sugar and cream. And the
books--they stood on the shelf by the bed, leaning together with always two or three laid flat
on top because he had not bothered to put them back properly. They were dog-eared and
scratched. There was the bright, shining one about Topsy and Mopsy that he never read
because it was about two girls; there was the one about the magician which you read with akind of tied-down terror, skipping page twenty-seven with the awful picture of the spider;
there was a book about people who had dug things up, Egyptian things; there was _The Boy's
Book of Trains_, _The Boy's Book of Ships_. Vividly they came before him; he could have
reached up and touched them, could feel the weight and slow slide with which _The
Mammoth Book for Boys_ would come out and slither down. . . . Everything was all right;
everything was good-humored and friendly.
The bushes crashed ahead of them. Boys flung themselves wildly from the pig track and
scrabbled in the creepers, screaming. Ralph saw Jack nudged aside and fall. Then there was a
creature bounding along the pig track toward him, with tusks gleaming and an intimidating
grunt. Ralph found he was able to measure the distance coldly and take aim. With the boar
only five yards away, he flung the foolish wooden stick that he carried, saw it hit the great
snout and hang there for a moment. The boar's note changed to a squeal and it swerved aside
into the covert. The pig-run filled with shouting boys again, Jack came running back, and
poked about in the undergrowth.
"Through here--"
"But he'd do us!"
"Through here, I said--"
The boar was floundering away from them. They found another pig-run parallel to the
first and Jack raced away. Ralph was full of fright and apprehension and pride.
"I hit him! The spear stuck in--"
Now they came, unexpectedly, to an open space by the sea. Jack cast about on the bare
rock and looked anxious.
"He's gone."
"I hit him," said Ralph again, "and the spear stuck in a bit."
He felt the need of witnesses.
"Didn't you see me?"
Maurice nodded.
"I saw you. Right bang on his snout--Wheee!"
Ralph talked on, excitedly.
"I hit him all right. The spear stuck in. I wounded him!"
He sunned himself in their new respect and felt that hunting was good after all.
"I walloped him properly. That was the beast, I think!" Jack came back.
"That wasn't the beast. That was a boar."
"I hit him."
"Why didn't you grab him? I tried--"
Ralph's voice ran up.