CHAPTER 1
Nucleases
An Overview
A. Fred Weir
Enzymes able to digest nucleic acids are of course essential to molecular
biology, indeed the whole technology was founded on the discovery
of bacterial enzymes that cleave DNA molecules in a base-specific
manner. These enzymes, the type II restriction endonucleases, are
perhaps the best studied of the nucleases as to both their in vivo role
and their use as tools in the techniques of molecular biology. However,
the nucleases are ubiquitous in living organisms and function in all
situations where partial or complete digestion of nucleic acid is required.
These situations not only include degradation and senescence but also
replication and recombination, although it must be noted that, to date,
evidence for the involvement of nucleases in the latter two processes
in eukaryotes is largely circumstantial. The significance of nucleases
in the functioning of nucleic acids as the genetic material can be gaged
however by considering that several enzymes implicated in DNA replication,
recombination, and repair have integral exo- or endodeoxyribonuclease
activity. For example, the 5'-3' and 3'-5' exonuclease
activity of DNA polymerases and the endo-DNase activity of topoisomerases
(e.g., see ref. 1).
As well as the restriction endonucleases, various other nuclease
enzymes have been used as tools in molecular biology, the purpose of
this chapter is to give some background on the main deoxyribonu-
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, VoL 16: Enzymes of Molecular Biology
Edited by: M. M. Burrell Copyright ©1993 Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ2 Weir
cleases (DNases) and then to focus on the techniques in which they are
used. The enzymes that molecular biologists use as tools are dealt with
in separate chapters in this volume.
1.1. Nomenclature
Anyone who has tried the isolation of a DNase enzyme will know
that the presence of multiple types of nuclease activity makes this
process fraught with difficulty. In this section, consideration will be
given to the properties of the DNase enzymes with a view to understanding
their nomenclature, which for the most part is somewhat
confusing (Table 1).
Nucleases, although a large group in themselves, are part of a larger
group of enzymes, the phosphodiesterases, which are able to catalyze
the cleavage of phosphate-ester bonds. Schmidt and Laskowsi (2) identified
three types of nuclease enzymatic activity: DNases, ribonucleases
(RNases), and exonucleases. On this definition, it is apparent that
so-called DNases and RNases cleave their substrates endonucleolytically,
i.e., at internal sites, and that this activity is distinct and separable from
any exonuclease activity. In practical terms, this definition holds true
in that an endo-DNase will not digest DNA molecules to completion,
i.e., to nucleotide monomers; only when exonuclease activity is present
will the digestion of DNA go to completion.
A second confusing element in the nomenclature of nucleases, and
DNases in particular, is the presence of single-stranded DNases, e.g.,
mung bean nuclease and nuclease S 1 fromAspergillus. These enzymes,
although having high specificity for single-stranded DNA molecules,
will, at high concentrations and in preparations not purified to homogeneity,
digest native (double-stranded) DNA molecules albeit at reduced
rates. For an example of this, Weir and Bryant (3) have isolated a nuclearlocated
DNase from the embryo axes of pea that has a low, but measurable
activity on native DNA but rapidly catalyzes the hydrolysis of
heat-denatured DNA. It is not known so far whether these two activities
are separable, but evidence from similar enzymes suggests that these
activities are part of the same protein molecule. DNases then, tend to
be classified as to "what they do best"; e.g., the DNase of Weir and Bryant
would be called a single-strand specific endo-DNase. In the following
discussion, the examples are from the DNase class of nucleases, however
all the points considered can be equally applied to the RNases.Nucleases--An Overview 3
Table 1
The Nomenclature of Nuclease
EC number Reaction Example
3.1. I 1 Exodeoxyribonucleases producing Exonuclease III
5'-phosphomonoesters. EC 3.1.11.2
3 . 1 . 1 3 Exoribonucleases producing Exo-RNase H
5'-phosphomonoesters. EC 3.1.13.2
3.1.14 Exoribonucleases producing Yeast RNase
other than 5'-phosphomonoesters. EC 3.1.14.1
3 . 1 . 1 5 Exonucleases active with either Venom
ribo- or deoxyribonucleic acids exonuclease
and producing EC 3.1.15.1
5'-phosphomonoesters.
3 . 1 . 1 6 Exonucleases active with either ribodeoxyribonucleic
acids and
producing other than
5'-phosphomonoesters.
3 . 1 . 2 1 Endodeoxyribonucleases producing
5'-phosphomonoesters.
3.1.22
3.1.25
3.1.26
3.1.27
3.1.30
3.1.31
Endodeoxyribonucleases producing
other than 5'-phosphomonoesters.
Site-specific endodeoxyribonucleases:
specific for altered bases.
Endoribonucleases producing
5'-phosphomonoesters.
Endoribonucleases producing
other than 5'-phosphomonoesters.
Endonucleases active with either
ribo- or deoxyribonucleic acids and
producing 5'-phosphomonoesters.
Endonucleases active with either
ribo- or deoxyribonucleic acids
and producing other than
5'-phosphomonoesters.
Spleen
exonuclease
EC 3.1.16.1
DNase I
EC 3.1.21.1
Type II
restriction DNases
EC 3.1.21.4
DNase II
EC 3.1.22.1
RNase H
EC 3.1.26.4
RNase T1
EC 3.1.27.3
Aspergillus
nuclease S1 and
Mung bean nuclease
EC 3.1.30.1
Micrococcal
nuclease
EC 3.1.31.14 Weir
1.1.1. Criteria Used for Classification
1.1.1.1. Exo- vs ENDONUCLEOLYTIC CLEAVAGE
Exo-DNases cleave from the ends of DNA molecules releasing
phosphomononucleotides. Cleavage can be either in the 3' to 5' direction
releasing 5' phosphomononucleotides or in the 5' to 3' direction to
yield 3' phosphomononucleotides. An example of a widely used exonuclease
is exonuclease III fromEscherichia coli (EC 3.1.11.2), which
will digest one strand of a double-stranded DNA molecule from a 3'
overhang or blunt end. This property has been used to produce bidirectional
or unidirectional nested deletion of templates for sequencing.
Endo-DNases cleave at internal phosphate bonds. Cleavage of
double-stranded DNA substrates can be by a "single-hit" or a "doublehit"
mechanism (4) or by a combination of both (see Chapter 2, Section
2.4.). Essentially this means that the enzymes can either cleave the two
strands of the DNA molecule at points opposite or at sites on the two
strands that are well away from each other. The scission of the molecule
will take place at a relatively faster rate in the former case as
compared to the latter. The prime example of an endo-DNase is pancreatic
DNase (DNase I, EC 3.1.21.1). Under optimal conditions this
enzyme uses a double-hit mechanism for cleavage of substrates.
1.1.1.2. BASE SPECIFICITY AT OR NEAR THE SITE OF CLEAVAGE
None of the eukaryotic enzymes so far isolated appear to have such
specificity, however there is evidence that enzymes with optimal activity
on single-stranded DNAs will preferentially cleave atA-T rich sites in
native DNA molecules (3,5,6). As already mentioned, the Type II
restriction endonucleases have absolute specificity for a group of bases
at or near the cleavage site.
1.1.1.3. SITE OF CLEAVAGE
The site of cleavage can be on either side of the phosphate bond
leading to a 5' or a 3' monoesterified product. No enzymes have been
isolated that can split the internucleotide bond on either side. This
property is particularly important if the DNA molecule is to be subsequently
made blunt-ended for a ligation experiment. DNA molecules
leh with a 5' overhang from a staggered cut are usually filled in with
the Klenow fragment ofE. coli DNA polymerase, whereas those with
a 3' overhang have the overhang cleaved back with the exonuclease
activity of T4 DNA polymerase to create blunt ends.Nucleases--An Overview 5
1.1.1.4. CLEAVAGE OF NATIVE OR SINGLE-STRANDED DNA
Nucleascs tcnd to havc a"prcfcrcnce" for cleavage of single-stranded
DNA or double-stranded DNA substratcs. In general single-strand
specific DNascs, such as nuclcasc SI fromAspergillus (EC 3.1.30.1),
will digest native DNA if the enzyme concentration is high. Nucleasc
S1 is used to analyzc the structure of DNA-RNA hybrids and in cDNA
synthesis whcrc it opens the hairpin loop gcncratcd during the synthesis.
1.1.1.5. GENERAL
DNascs have also in the past bccn classified according to their pH
optima and rcquircmcnts for thc presence of mctal ions; there arc two
major mammalian DNascs--onc working at neutral pH the othcr in
acidic conditions--and both rcquirc Mg ions. Other nuclcasc cnzymcs
exist that require Ca 2+ ions (pea nuclear DNasc [3]) or Zn 2+ ions
(nuclcasc S 1). In addition to the aforementioned propertics, it is important
to note that many crudc preparations of DNasc exhibit nonspccificity
for the sugar moiety of nucleic acids, i.e., they will cleave both RNA
and DNA. In these cases it is obviously essential to remove contaminating
RNasc activity before the enzyme is used to remove DNA from
a preparation of RNA.
From the forcgoing discussion, it can bc sccn that the nuclcascs arc
a complex group of cnzymcs. However, when it comes to their use as
tools in molecular biology, the situation is very much simplified as
only a handful of enzymes arc used routincly in experimental protocols.
The enzymes DNascs I and II, cxonucleascs, nuclcasc S l, Bal3 l,
and RNasc will bc discusscd in much more dctail in the following
sections with special emphasis on the experimental protocols for thcir
use in molecular biology techniques.
References
1. Roca, J. and Mczquita, C. (1989) DNA topoisomcrasc II activity in nonrcplicaring,
transcriptionally inactive, chickcn late spcrmatids. EMBO J. 8, 1855-1860.
2. Schmidt, G. and Laskowski, St., M. (1969) Phosphate ester cleavage, in Enzymes,
vol. 5b (Walkcr, P. D., Lardy, H., and Myrback, A., cds.), Acadcmic, Ncw
York, pp. 3-35.
3, Weir, A. F. and Bryant, J. A. (1989) Partial purification and properties of a
chromatin-bound dcoxyribonuclcasc from the embryo axes of germinating pea.
Phytochemistry 28, 1339-1343.
4. Bernardi, G. and Sadron, C. (1964) Studies on acid dcoxyribonuclcasc. I. Kinctics
of the initial degradation of DNA by acid DNase. Biochemistry 3, 1411-1418.CHAPTER 2
Deoxyribonuclease
I (EC 3.1.21.1) and II (EC 3.1.22.1)
A. Fred Weir
1. Introduction
From Chapter 1 on nucleases, we know that the term DNase refers
to an enzyme that endonucleolytically cleaves DNA molecules. This
chapter deals with those DNases that preferentially catalyze the hydrolysis
of double-stranded DNA (ds DNA) and that have found a use in
the various techniques employed in molecular biology. The Type II
restriction endonucleases obviously fall into this category, however
they are a large subject on their own and therefore are dealt with in a
separate section of this book. DNases acting preferentially on singlestranded
DNA (ss DNA) substrates are also dealt with in another section
of this chapter.
Despite the ubiquitous nature of nucleases in living organisms, it is
perhaps surprising to find that, apart from the Type II restriction endonucleases,
only one ds DNA DNase enzyme is used routinely in molecular
biology. The reasons for this are twofold. First, as outlined in Chapter
1, it is very difficult to isolate a DNase in a form that is completely free
of accompanying RNase and exonuclease contamination and indeed
these activities may be part of the same enzyme molecule. Obviously,
it would not be desirable to remove DNA from a precious RNA preparation
with a DNase that has an integral RNase activity. The second
reason is that the first DNase isolated from tissues, DNase I (or pancreatic
DNase), performs all the tasks very well and can be isolated
readily in a pure form; why use or look for another enzyme? DNase I
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, VoL 16: Enzymes of Molecular Biology
Edited by: M. M. Burrell Copyright ©1993 Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
78 Weir
has been commercially available for at least 25 years, most of the work
on the properties of the enzyme being done in the 1960s and, to date,
no DNase has been found to replace it in the dual tasks of complete
degradation of"nuisance material" DNA and the partial hydrolysis of
DNA molecule in such techniques as nick translation.
In the following sections, the properties of DNase I are discussed in
detail with special emphasis directed toward comparing the activity of
DNase I with that of other types of DNase, most notably DNase II.
2. DNase I (EC 3.1.21.1)
2.1. Reaction
Bovine pancreatic DNase, or more usually, DNase I, catalyzes the
hydrolysis of ds DNA molecules but, at high concentrations of enzyme,
ss DNA will also be digested. "Complete" hydrolysis results in the
formation of small oligonucleotide products that are resistant to further
cleavage, but are acid soluble (see section on assay of DNase
activity); cleavage results in the formation of 5' monoesterified products.
Cleavage of DNA substrate with DNase II (spleen DNase or acid
DNase, EC 3.1.22.1), in contrast, results in the formation of 3'
monoesterified products.
2.2. pH Optimum
Possibly the major reason that DNase I is preferred to DNase II is
that DNase I has optimum activity in the region of pH 7-8, whereas
DNase II, as its alternative name describes, has a pH optimum in acidic
condition: pH 4.2-5.5.
2.3. Activators and lnhibitors
DNase I has an absolute requirement for divalent metal cations. The
most commonly used is Mg 2÷, however Mn 2÷, Ca 2+, Co 2+, and Zn 2+
will also activate DNase I. Concentrations of Mg 2÷ above approx 50
mM become inhibitory, which is not the case for Co 2÷ and Mn 2÷.
Monovalent metal ions are also inhibitors of the enzyme activity. In
the presence of Ca 2÷, Mg 2÷ has a synergistic effect, i.e., the rate of
hydrolysis of DNA in the presence of both ions is more than the sum
of the rates of hydrolysis of DNA in the presence of each ion separately.
A total of 0.1 mM Ca 2÷ is sufficient to give this enhanced reactivity
in the presence of 10 mM Mg 2÷, however the rate of hydrolysis
of DNA is still greatest in the presence of Mn 2+ ions (see Section 2.4.).Deoxyribonucleases of Molecular Biology
A
9
3 '
5 '
5 ' 5'P. 5*P 5°P 3 '
3 ' 5 ' P 5 '
5 ' 5 ' P 5 ' P 5 ' P 3 '
3 ' 5 ' P 5 ' P 5 ' P ~ 5 ' P .5'
B 5, .3,
3, .5,
5 ~ 3*P 3 ' P .3~P 3 '
3 ' 3 ' P 3 ' P 3~P 5*
Fig. 1. A. Double-hit mechanism of DNase I in presence of Mg 2+ ions. B. Singlehit
mechanism of DNase II.
Apart from the monovalent cations, there is no general inhibitor of
DNase I such as those available for the inhibition of RNases. The only
real way to combat DNase activity, which may be a worry during DNA
extractions, is to do the extraction as quickly as possible and at low
temperatures. Inclusion of EDTA in the extraction buffer is a good
idea, but note that Jones and Boffey (1) recently discovered a DNase
in the leaves of wheat seedlings that appears to be stimulated in the
presence of EDTA.
2.4. Kinetics
Using a variety of methods, including light-scattering, viscometry,
and sedimentation analysis, it can be shown that there are two different
types of mechanism for the cleavage of ds DNA substrates by DNase
(Fig. 1). DNase I, at low concentrations and under the usual assay
conditions, inserts nicks at random points in each strand of the DNA
at points away from each other. This is termed a "double-hit" mechanism
(Fig. 1 A); complete scission of the molecule will not occur until two10 Weir
nicks are opposite. Monitoring of the reaction therefore will not indicate
the presence of DNA molecules of intermediate size until after a lag
phase (2a). In contrast, DNase II was shown to cleave high-mol-wt
DNA substrates on both strands at points opposite to each other resulting
in the complete scission of the molecule (3). This process was termed
a single-hit mechanism (Fig. 1B), as scission of the DNA occurred
from a single encounter with the enzyme molecule; during a digestion,
intermediate size molecules will appear immediately. An interesting
feature of DNase I is that the cleavage mechanism can be altered from
double-hit to a DNase II-like single-hit mechanism by using high concentrations
of the enzyme or by altering the divalent cation from Mg 2÷ to
Mn 2÷ or Co 2÷. Using ss DNA as substrate, Melgar and Goldthwaite
(2b) showed that in the presence of Mn 2÷ ions, DNase I had vastly
increased Vma x as compared to the activity in the presence of Mg 2÷,
whereas there was little change in the K m. The increased rate of hydrolysis
in the presence of Mn 2÷ could of itself lead to the formation of
intermediate size fragments in the short periods observed without there
being a change in the actual mechanism of cleavage of a double-stranded
substrate; the greater the number of random nicks, the greater the
likelihood of there being scission of the molecules. If viscosity measurements
are used to follow the progress of a DNase digestion, a relationship
can be obtained when the log of a function of the change in
viscosity of the DNA solution is plotted against log time. The slope of
the resulting line, n, gives an indication of the mechanism of the reaction:
A value of approx 1.0 indicates single-hit kinetics, whereas a value
between 1 and 2 indicates a predominantly double-hit mechanism. When
the hydrolysis ofds DNA by DNase I in the presence of Mn 2÷ is monitored
by viscometry at low temperature, i.e., at low rate of hydrolysis, a value
of n = 1.16 is obtained, indicating that the reaction is predominantly of
the single-hit kind. Monovalent cations also lower the rate of hydrolysis
of ds DNA by DNase I in the presence of Mn 2÷, and under these
conditions the n value changes from approx 1.0 (single-hit mechanism)
to values approaching 2.0 (double-hit mechanism). The inhibition of
DNase I by monovalent cations is probably a result of competition for
effector sites that directly or indirectly affect the active site of the enzyme.
The process by which Mn a÷ promotes the hydrolysis of ds DNA by
DNase I to switch from a double-hit mechanism to a single-hit mechanism
is not known but may involve either (1) the ability of Mn 2÷ toDeoxyribonucleases of Molecular Biology 11
promote the binding of two DNase I molecules at opposite sites on the
two DNA strands (it is known that active DNase II is dimeric); or (2)
the ability of Mn a÷ to enable the DNase I enzyme molecule to flip
from the hydrolyzed strand to the opposite strand, which is then also
cleaved (2b).
2.5. Specificity
There is evidence that certain deoxynucleotide sequences can be
hydrolyzed in the presence of Mn 2+ but not in the presence of Mg 2+.
For example, poly (dG:dC) can be hydrolyzed by DNase I with Mn 2÷
but not with Mg2÷(4). This resistance is not attributable to secondary
structure of the double-helix, as DNase I in the presence of Mg 2÷ is
not able to hydrolyze the dC strand of a polymer consisting of
dI:dC. Therefore, in addition to altering the kinetics of the reaction,
different metal ions can also place qualitative constraints on hydrolysis
of certain residues.
3. Experimental Procedures
3.1. Introduction
DNase I is the enzyme of choice for all molecular biology techniques
(apart from restriction digestions) that require a double-stranded
DNase enzyme. It is readily available in pure form, i.e., exonuclease
and RNase free, from a number of commercial sources, has high activity
on ds DNA, and at high concentrations, will also cleave ss DNA.
The reaction does not go to completion, to produce deoxynucleotide
monomers, but a certain limit size is reached, after which no further
digestion takes place. DNase I cleavage leads to the formation of 5'
monoesterified products and the enzyme has optimum activity in the
pH 7.0 region. DNase I is inhibited by monovalent cation but has an
absolute requirement for divalent metal ions. The nature of the cation
affects the mode of action of the enzyme and its ability to cleave at
certain deoxynucleotide residues. The enzyme has optimal activity in
the presence of Mn 2+ cations, but it is noteworthy that molecular biologists
use Mg 2+ as the cofactor. This is probably attributable to the
fact that many of the enzymes used in conjunction with DNase also
require Mg 2+ as cofactor, e.g., DNA polymerase I in the nick-translation
protocol, and that many of the techniques require only limited
digestion of the DNA.12 Weir
3.2. Assay of DNase Activity
Many methods have been used in the past to assay DNase activity:
Melgar and Goldthwaite (2a) used a somewhat complicated method
whereby T4 DNA was labeled with 32p and embedded in a polyacrylamide
gel. After exposure of the gel to DNase, the gel was pelleted and
the amount of radioactive DNA fragments released into the supernatant
was measured. More recent methods (e.g., ref. 5) have again used
radiolabeled substrates, but this time the rate of hydrolysis is monitored
by precipitating the DNA fragments produced out of aqueous solution
with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in the presence of a carrier and then
measuring acid-soluble or acid-insoluble radioactivity. For most molecular
biologists however, all that is required is an assay method to show
whether DNase is responsible for the loss of DNA from a preparation,
and if so, to show where the contamination is coming from. This is best
accomplished by using a covalently closed circular (ccc) plasmid as
substrate in a component analysis. In the following example, the components
of a restriction enzyme digestion ofa plasmid are to be analyzed.
1. Set up several reactions depending on the number of components to be
tested, remember that the controls are all important.
a. ccc plasmid in sterile distilled water (500 ng in 10 I.tL)
b. ccc plasmid in buffer
c. ccc plasmid in buffer + bovine serum albumin (BSA)
d. ccc plasmid in buffer + enzyme
e. ccc plasmid in buffer + BSA + enzyme
2. Incubate at 37°C for 30-60 min.
3. Run digests on an agarose gel.
4. Stain with ethidium bromide and view under UV illumination.
Endo-DNase activity is indicated by excessive conversion, as compared
to the controls, ofccc plasmid to open circles or to linears. Usually
endo-DNase contamination will be accompanied by exonuclease activity,
so there will be complete degradation of the plasmid to a smear of material
down the gel.
3.3. Removal of DNase Activity
DNase enzymes are heat labile and can be removed from solutions
by autoclaving and from glassware and the like by baking or autoclaving.
To make sure that solutions of RNase I are DNase free, boil theDeoxyribonucleases of Molecular Biology 13
RNase solution for 15 min (RNase I is a remarkably stable enzyme)
and cool to room temperature. Dispense into aliquots and store frozen.
As already mentioned (Section 2.2.), during the preparation of DNA,
endogenous DNases can be inhibited by the inclusion of EDTA in the
homogenization buffer. It was also pointed out that a DNase activity
had recently been discovered that was apparently stimulated by EDTA
(1). The prevalence of this type of nuclease activity is not known, but
if it is suspected, damage can be limited by performing extractions at
low temperatures and proceeding to the protein removal step as rapidly
as possible.
3.4. Removal of RNase from DNase Solutions
RNase-free preparations of DNase I are now commercially available,
however some of these still may not be entirely satisfactory.
Various column chromatography methods have been used to remove
RNase activity from DNase solutions (e.g., ref. 6) and an effective
method for disabling the RNase A enzyme has been described by
Zimmerman and Sadeen (7) and modified by Gurney and Gurney (8).
This method depends on the alkylation of a histidine in the active site
of RNase A (a likely contaminant of DNase I as they are derived from
the same tissue) using sodium iodoacetate. Abrief protocol is outlined
in the following:
1. Use autoclaved micropipet tips and glassware.
2. Dissolve 10 mg commercial DNase in 2 mL of 2.5 mM HC1.
3. Dialyze the solution for a few hours at 40°C against 1 L of 2.5 mM HC1
with stirring, then overnight against 1 L of fresh 2.5 mM HCI again at
4°C with stirring.
4. Freshly prepare 1M sodium iodoacetate. Mix 2.5 mL of 0.2M sodium acetate,
pH 5.3, 2.0 mL of dialyzed enzyme, and 7.5 mL of 1M sodium iodoacetate.
Incubate the mixture at 55°C for 60 min. A precipitate will form.
5. Dialyze the solution overnight against 1 L of 2.5 mM HCI at 4°C.
6. Centrifuge solution at 10,000g for 30 min at 0°C.
7. Carefully pipet off the supernatant into a sterilized tube or bottle with a
tight fitting cap.
8. The protein concentration should be 3-4 mg/mL. The DNase should be
stored at 4°C, the activity should be stable (unfrozen) for at least 2 yr.
RNases can also be inhibited by a number of compounds including
vanadyl ribonuclease complex, heparin, and their own specific ribo14 Weir
nuclease inhibitors. RNases are dealt with in much more detail elsewhere
in this volume (Chapter 13).
3.5. "Degradative" Uses of DNase I
Stock solutions ofDNase I should be made up at 2 mg/mL in 10 mM
Tris-HC1, pH 7.5, 50 mM NaC1, 10 mM MgCI2, 1 mM dithiothreitol,
and 50% glycerol, and stored frozen in small aliquots. Removal of
DNA from preparations can be accomplished by incubation with 20-
50 ~tg/mL DNase I in the presence of 50 mM Tris-HC1, pH 7.5, 10 mM
MgC12, at 37°C for 60 min.
A method for preparing random oligonucleotide fragments from calf
thymus DNA for use in the oligolabeling protocol can be found in (9).
3.6. Nick Translation
The alternative method for producing radiolabeled probes other
than oligolabeling is nick translation. In this method DNase I is used
to nick the DNA to be labeled creating free 3'OH groups. Escherichia
coli DNA polymerase I catalyzes the addition of nucleotides to the
3'OH termini and the 5'-3' exonuclease activity of the same enzyme
removes nucleotides from the 5' end thus translating the nick. Linear,
supercoiled, nicked, or gapped circular ds DNA molecules can be labeled
to specific activities of > 108 cpm/~tg with 32p labeled deoxynucleotide
triphosphates. Good protocols for the method are given in refs. 10 and
11 and Chapter 3. Meinkoth and Wahl (10) pointed out that, at saturating
levels of nucleotide triphosphates, the size of the labeled fragments is
determined by the DNase concentration: Fragments of 500-1500 nucleotides
long produce optimal signal:noise ratios in the subsequent
hybridization. The necessary concentration of DNase required can be
determined by doing a titration using from 0-100 pg/mL DNase in the
reactions and running the labeled DNA on acrylamide gels (9). DNase
concentration, which gives approx 30% incorporation of label, is optimal.
3. 7. DNA Footprinting by DNase I Protection
DNase I has been used in the past to dissect the structure of chromatin
and to isolate nucleosomes (e.g., see 12,13), but in recent years
molecular biologists have become interested in the proteins that bind
to DNA and possibly regulate the expression of genes. The isolation
and characterization of such transactivating factors can be accomplished
by using the powerful technique of DNA footprinting. In thisDeoxyribonucleases of Molecular Biology 15
technique the DNA of interest is labeled at either the 3' or 5' end and
protein is bound to the DNA; the nucleoprotein complex is then subject
to limited digestion with DNase I. Under the conditions used,
DNase will exhibit double-hit kinetics and, therefore, will insert random
single-strand nicks, however, cleavage will be inhibited if protein
is already bound to the DNA. The DNA is then purified, denatured,
and run on a sequencing polyacrylamide gel. Autoradiography of the
labeled DNA in the gel should show a ladder of fragments representing
cleavage at approximately every base for the control with no protein
present. However, if protein has been bound to a particular sequence,
there will be no cleavage by DNase I and there will be a gap in the
ladder. This gap is known as a footprint; the sequence of the footprint
can be determined if a sequencing reaction is run alongside the DNase
I protection assay. Detailed protocols for the technique are given in
refs. 14 and 15, also note that Stratagene now markets a DNA
footprinting kit using the DNase I protection method. Exonuclease III
protection has also been used for DNA footprinting, but in this technique
the DNA must be labeled at the 5' end (see ref. 15).
3.8. Concluding Remarks
The DNases are a ubiquitous and diverse group of enzymes that play
an integral part in the functioning of DNA as the genetic material. Much
of the work on DNases has been directed toward finding useful tools for
molecular biology rather than toward elucidating their physiological
roles; despite this, only one of the DNases, DNase I, has found regular
use in techniques where limited digestion or complete digestion of
DNA is required. The prospects are that other eukaryotic DNase will
be found with more specific activities than DNase I, e.g., the enzymes
involved in DNA repair and DNases that may function in recombination
events. Analysis and use of these enzymes will possibly give us
a greater insight into how DNA does function as the genetic material.
References
1. Jones, M. and Boffey, S. A. (1984) Deoxyribonuclease activities of wheat seedlings.
FEBS Lett. 174, 215-218.
2a. Melgar, E. and Goldthwaite, D. A. (1968) Deoxyribonucleic acid nucleases. 1.
The use of a new method to observe the kinetics of deoxyribonucleic acid degradation
by deoxyribonuclease I, deoxyribonuclease II and Escherichia coli endonuclease
I. J. Biol. Chem. 243, 4401-4408.CHAPTER 3
DNA Polymerases (EC 2.7.7.7)
Martin J. Maunders
1. Introduction
DNA polymerases catalyze the synthesis of DNA molecules from
monomeric deoxynucleotide triphosphate units. This definition encompasses
those enzymes classed as DNA-dependent DNA polymerases
(EC 2.7.7.7, which require both a DNA template strand and a DNA
primer to which the monomeric units can be added), reverse transcriptases
(EC 2.7.7.49, RNA-dependent DNA polymerases that utilize
an RNA template), and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferases
(EC 2.7.7.31, which require no template). This chapter will consider
only DNA-dependent DNA polymerases (EC 2.7.7.7, DNA
nucleotidyltransferases, DNA-directed).
DNA-dependent DNA polymerases are a class of enzyme that is
essential for the replication and maintenance of all organisms. All
perform essentially the same reaction, the addition of monomeric units
to synthesize a complementary copy of an existing DNA template.
This activity can be used in molecular biology for a wide range of
techniques. These include the labeling of DNA molecules, terminally
or throughout the sequence, for use as probes or for sequence determination,
the modification of DNA termini for facilitating subsequent
manipulations, the production of double-stranded cDNA, the extension
of mismatched sequences for site-directed mutagenesis, the extension
of synthetic DNA sequences for gene synthesis, and the specific
amplification of limiting quantities of DNA for analysis.
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, Vol. 16: Enzymes of Molecular Biology
Edited by: M. M. Burrell Copyright ©1993 Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
1718 Maunders
The choice of enzyme depends on the reaction conditions employed
and the desirability of other inherent enzymatic activities. The range
of enzymes available is rapidly expanding, ensuring a concomitant
increase in the applications of DNA polymerases in molecular biology.
1.1. Prokaryotic DNA Polymerases
The classical E. coli DNA polymerase family consists ofDNA polymerases
I, II, and III (Pol I, Pol II, and Pol III). Pol III is largely
responsible for chromosomal replication, and it initiates the growth of
both DNA chains on RNA primers. Pol I "fills in" the gaps left by the
intermittent nature of Pol III activity on the 3'-5' strand. Apart from
this activity, the major role of Pol I is in DNA repair rather than replication.
The role of Pol II is still largely unclear.
The three enzymes have widely differing properties. Pol I, which is
the most ~videly used in molecular biology, is described in the next
section. Pol II has a polymerase activity of only 5% that of Pol I and
has no 5'-3' exonuclease activity. It can only act on duplexes with gaps
of < 100 bases and cannot replicate long single-stranded stretches from
short primers. Pol III has a similar template requirement to Pol II, but
is 300 times more active. Pol III holoenzyme consists of at least 13
components (1), although various smaller complexes are active in vitro.
In addition to the E. coli enzymes, DNA polymerases from other
bacteria are now attaining more prominence in molecular biology,
particularly those from thermophilic organisms. Other useful DNA
polymerases have been isolated from bacteriophage-infected E. coli
cells, especially the enzymes encoded by bacteriophages T4 and T7.
1.2. Eukaryotic DNA Polymerases
Eukaryotic organisms possess three main DNApolymerases, Pol a,
Po113, and Pol Y. Pol a is considered to be the major DNA polymerase
(2) and is responsible for chromosomal replication. The function of
Po113 is unclear, whereas Pol ?, being located in both the nucleus and
the mitochondria, is believed to be involved in mitochondrial DNA
replication. The three enzymes all lack 3'-5' exonuclease activity, which
has since been detected on a fourth DNA polymerase, Pol 8 (3). This
finding supports the idea that eukaryotic DNA polymerases work in
concert during DNA replication.DNA Polymerase 19
2. DNA Polymerase I (EC 2.7.7.7)
DNA polymerase I, Pol I, or Kornberg polymerase is the product of
the pol A gene of E. coli, which has now been cloned to yield an
overproducing strain.
2.1. Enzyme Data
The enzyme comprises a single polypeptide chain of mol mass
109,000 Da, with various enzymic activities. These are a 5'-3' polymerase,
a 3'-5' exonuclease (proofreading activity), a 5'-3' exonuclease,
and a phosphate-exchange activity. The polymerase activity
catalyzes the formation of a complementary DNA strand to an existing
single-stranded template, by the extension of a DNA primer possessing
a 3'-hydroxyl terminus. The latter may be provided merely by a
short gap or even a nick in the DNA duplex. The presence of these
multiple activities allows the use of DNA polymerase I to perform
several complex manipulations.
DNA polymerase I requires the presence of magnesium ions, as do
all DNA polymerases. (In some cases, manganese ions may substitute,
but reaction rates are lower, and there is a loss of fidelity.) The pH
optimum for the enzyme is 7.4, and sulfhydryl reagents are required.
Enzymic activity is measured by the polymerization of labeled nucleotides
into double-stranded DNA using poly-dAdT as both template
and primer. One unit of activity catalyzes the incorporation of 10 nmol
into an acid precipitable form in 30 min at 37°C (4). DNA Polymerase
I can be obtained at a purity of 5000 U/mg.
2.2. Uses of DNA Polymerase I
There are several uses of DNA polymerase I in molecular biology.
First, it is used for the incorporation of labeled nucleotides into DNA
probes by nick translation (5). This requires the action of deoxyribonuclease
I (see Chapter 2) to introduce nicks into the duplex with
exposed 3'-hydroxyl termini to act as a substrate for the DNA polymerase
I. 5'-3' Polymerization occurs concomitantly with 5'-3' exonuclease
activity, which has the effect of physically translating the "nick"
along the DNA molecule and allowing the introduction of labeled
nucleotides into the newly replaced DNA strand. Reaction conditions
are such that one complete exchange of the DNA duplex is achieved20 Maunders
in this manner. DNA polymerase I is the only common DNA polymerase
that can carry out this coupled reaction by virtue of its 5'-3'
exonuclease function. A typical nick translation protocol is given in
Section 2.3.1.
Disadvantages of nick translation with regard to other methods of
probe labeling include the facts that the specific activity that may be
achieved is not high, and that at temperatures above 20°C artifactual
sequences ar e produced, such as "snapback DNA," where the newly
synthesized strand disassociates from the template and is then itself
copied to form inverted DNA sequences.
Another use of DNA polymerase I is in repair synthesis, where the
enzyme is used to "fill in" protruding 5' termini. End-labeling can also
be achieved by removal of 3' protruding termini by the 3'-5' exonuclease
activity and then subsequently filling in the 3' recess so formed.
DNA polymerase I can also be used in eDNA synthesis, where it is
employed in the synthesis of the second DNA strand. The enzyme has
an inherent RNase H activity that is of value here. However, cDNA
synthesis is largely performed by DNA polymerase I large (Klenow)
fragment or reverse transcriptase.
2.3. Experimental Procedures
DNA polymerase I is best stored in 50 mM potassium phosphate, pH
7.0, containing 250 ktM DTT and 50% glycerol. At -20°C, it is stable
for over 6 mo.
2.3.1. Protocol for Nick Translation with DNA Polymerase I
2.3.1.1. MATERIALS REQUIRED
1. Probe DNA.
2. Nick translation buffer:
• 500 mM Tris-HC1, pH 7.8
• 50 mMMgC12
• 100 mM ~-Mercaptoethanol
• 100 ktg/mL Bovine serum albumin
3. 200 jaM dGTP.
4. 200 ~/dCTP.
5. 200 pM dTTP.
6. 0.1 lag/mL DNase I (prepare by serial dilution of 1 mg/mL stock).
7. DNA polymerase I (diluted to 2 U/laL in storage buffer).DNA Polymerase 21
8. 0.5M EDTA, pH 8.0.
9. TNE buffer:
• 10 mMTris-HCl, pH 8.0
• 100 mM NaC1
• 1 mM EDTA
10. TE buffer:
• 10 mMTris-HC1, pH 8.0
• 1 mM EDTA
11. Sephadex G-50 equilibrated in TNE buffer.
12. o~-32P dATP (10 mCi/mL, 3000 Ci/mmol).
13. Sterile distilled water.
2.3.1.2. EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
1. Water bath (15°C).
2. Water bath (70°C) or dry beating block.
3. Bench-top centrifuge.
4. Sterile glass wool.
5. Sterile 1.5-mL microfuge tubes.
5. Pipets and sterile pipet tips.
7. Ice bucket.
2.3.1.3. PROTOCOL
1. In a sterile tube on ice mix the following:
• Probe DNA (up to 1 pg)
• 5 ~L Nick translation buffer
• 200 pM dGTP, dCTP, dTTP (5 I.tL each)
• 5 ~L a-32p dATP (50 gCi, 20 ~ / )
• 2 ~L DNase I (200 pg)
• 1 gL DNA polymerase I (2 U)
• Sterile distilled water to 50 ~L
2. Incubate at 15°C for 50 min.
3. Stop the reaction by addition of 2 pL of 0.5M EDTA, pH 8.0, or by
heating to 70°C for l0 min.
4. Purify the labeled probe from unincorporated nucleotides by a spun
column method. Prepare a column of Sephadex G-50 in a 200-taL pipet
tip plugged with glass wool. Wash the column with 500 ~L TNE buffer,
by supporting it in a microfuge tube and spinning at 2000g for a few
seconds. Load the nick translation reaction onto the column, and spin
for 30 s. Elute the labeled probe with a futher 100 gl_, of TNE (or TE)
buffer and a further spin. Pool the run-through and eluate, and then
discard the column containing the unincorporated nucleotides.22 Maunders
3. Klenow Fragment
3.1. Enzyme Data
By treatment of DNA polymerase I with the protease subtilisin, a
polypeptide of mol mass 35,000 Da is removed that carries the 5'-3'
exonuclease activity (6). The remaining moiety, of mol mass 76,000
Da, retains all the other enzymic activities and is commonly termed the
DNA polymerase I large fragment or Klenow fragment.
3.2. Uses of Klenow Fragment
It is impossible to use Klenow fragment for nick translation because
of the lack of a 5'-3' exonuclease activity. However, this limitation is
turned to advantage in other applications of the enzyme by rendering
the polymerization activity more controllable.
The primer extension activity of Klenow fragment has made it widely
used in dideoxynucleotide sequencing methods (7), whereby DNA
templates up to 350 bases long can be sequenced at a rate of 45 nucleotides/
s. Several different DNA polymerases are commonly used for
sequencing reactions. Each has distinct abilities when encountering
particularly "difficult" regions of the template sequence.
The enzyme can also be used to produce labeled double-stranded
DNA probes (actually only labeled in one or the other of the two
strands) by the extension of oligomeric primers of random sequence
(8). The oligolabeling technique produces probes of a much higher
specific activity than nick translation, with over 55% of the labeled
nucleotide incorporated in 30 min at 37°C. Although the entire probe
sequence is represented in the labeling mix, individual molecules are
commonly only a few hundred bases in length, which may be a disadvantage
for some applications. A typical reaction protocol is given in
Section 3.3.1.
Single-stranded (strand-specific) probes can also be prepared by
end-labeling of protruding, flush, or recessed 3' termini. This is achieved
by removal of the 3' nucleotides by means of the 3'-5' exonuclease
activity (which is more active on single-stranded than double-stranded
DNA), to form a recessed 3' end. Following the addition of high concentrations
of deoxynucleotide triphosphates (one or more of which
may be labeled), the polymerase activity resynthesizes the excised
region (9,10). This process has advantages over nick translation in thatDNA Polymerase 23
the labeled probe produced is strand-specific, and there is no production
of hairpin-like artifacts.
This reaction can of course be performed with unlabeled deoxynucleotides
to produce flush or modified termini for subsequent cloning
reactions. The fill-in reaction (see Section 3.3.2.) can be controlled
by the withholding of one particular deoxynucleotide to generate novel
cohesive ends. Excess Klenow fragment will also yield only partially
filled termini because of the 3'-5' exonuclease activity.
Klenow fragment is also used for elongating oligomeric primers in
site-directed mutagenesis to produce double-stranded DNA. However,
the enzyme tends to displace mismatched oligomers and so remove
the intended mutation. T4 DNApolymerase is perhaps more useful in
this context.
The enzyme can also be used for the synthesis of the second DNA
strand during cDNA synthesis (11,12). Finally, Klenow fragment was
originally used in the polymerase chain reaction, before the introduction
of thermostable DNA polymerases permitted the process to be automated.
3. 3. Experimental Procedures
Klenow fragment has similar physical properties to Pol I and should
be stored under similar conditions. The following sections describe
experimental protocols for two techniques utilizing Klenow fragment:
radiolabeling DNA by extension of random primers and in-filling of
cohesive termini.
3.3.1. Protocol for Labeling with Random Hexameric Primers
3.3.1.1. ~/[ATERIALS REQUIRED
1. Probe DNA.
2. Reaction buffer:
• 450 mM HEPES, pH 6.6
• 50 mM MgCI 2
• 10 mM Dithiothreitol
• 2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumin
• 2.5 mM dGTP
• 2.5 mM dCTP
• 2.5 mM dTTP
3. Klenow fragment (diluted to 2 U/gL in storage buffer).
4. ct-32P dATP (10 mCi/mL, 3000 Ci/mmol).
5. Sterile distilled water.24 Maunders
3.3.1.2. EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
1. 1.5-mL Microfuge tubes.
2. Microfuge.
3. Boiling water bath or dry heating block.
4. Water bath (37°C).
5. Pipets and sterile pipet tips.
6. Ice bucket.
3.3.1.3. PROTOCOL
1. Dilute 50 ng probe DNA to 34 ~tL with sterile water.
2. Denature by boiling for 3 rain. Spin down condensation and stand on ice.
3. Add l0 ~L of reaction buffer.
4. Add 5 laL (50 [xCi) a-32P dATP.
5. Add 1 laL (2 U) Klenow fragment.
6. Incubate at 37°C for 30 min or at room temperature for 1-2 h.
7. Add 200 ]aL sterile water, and terminate the reaction by boiling for 3 min.
8. Stand the reaction on ice and use (unpurified) within 10 min.
3.3.2. Protocol for In-Filling Cohesive Termini
3.3.2.1. MATERIALS REQUIRED
1. Target DNA.
2. Reaction buffer:
• 70 mM Tris-HC1, pH 7.5
• 70 mMMgC12
• 10 mMDithiothreitol
• 250 laM dATP
• 250 ~ dGTP
• 250 laM dCTP
• 250 gM dTTP
N.B. Alternatively, the in-filling reaction can be performed in most
restriction endonuclease buffers.
3. 500 mM NaC1.
4. Klenow fragment (diluted to 0.5 U/IaL in storage buffer).
5. Sterile distilled water.
3.3.2.2. EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
1. 1.5-mL Microfuge tubes.
2. Water bath (25°C).
3. Water bath or dry heating block (70°C).
4. Pipets and sterile pipet tips.DNA Polymerase 25
3.3.2.3. PROTOCOL
1. Dilute 1 ~tg of target DNA to 44 laL with distilled water.
2. Add 5 IxL of reaction buffer.
3. Optionally, add NaCI to a concentration of 0-50 mM, reducing the volume
of water use in step 1 pro rata.
4. Add 1 IxL (0.5 U) of Klenow fragment.
5. Incubate at 25°C for 15 min.
6. Terminate the reaction by incubating at 70°C for 10 min.
4. T4 DNA Polymerase
T4 DNA polymerase is produced by the E. coli bacterium when
infected with bacteriophage T4.
4.1. Enzyme Data
It is a monomeric enzyme ofmol mass 114,000 Da, that will sequentially
add mononucleotide units to a DNA primer by means of its 5'-3'
polymerase activity. The enzyme cannot utilize nicked DNA as a
substrate, since its lack of a 5'-3' exonuclease activity (13) prevents it
from displacing the existing downstream DNA strand. The enzyme
has a highly active 3'-5' proofreading exonuclease activity, 200-fold
more active than that of Klenow fragment, which again is more active
against single- than double-stranded DNA.
4.2. Uses ofT4 DNA Polymerase
T4 DNA polymerase is used to label 3' termini in the same manner
as Klenow fragment. The reaction can be performed at 37°C or at room
temperature, but incubation at 12°C maximizes the polymerase activity
over that of the exonuclease.
The exonucleolysis/in-filling process can of course be performed in
the absence of labeled deoxynucleotide triphosphate to convert cohesive
or "ragged" termini to "polished" flush ends suitable for cloning.
A further use of T4 DNA polymerase is in the process of"gap-filling"
during site-directed mutagenesis. This entails the conversion of a
partially single-stranded molecule to a fully double-stranded entity.
For this application, it is usual to include the T4 gene 32 protein, which
stimulates DNA synthesis (14).26 Maunders
4. 3. Experimental Procedures
T4 DNA polymerase will function in most restriction endonuclease
buffers. An alternative reaction buffer is 50 mMTris-HC1, pH 8.5, 15 mM
ammonium sulfate, 7 mMMgC12, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10 mM ~-mercaptoethanol,
33 ~,/dNTPs, and 200 pg/mL BSA (15). The enzyme requires
Mg 2+ (at least 6 mM) for activity. Its pH optimum is in the range
8.0-9.0, exhibiting 50% activity at pH 7.5 and 9.7. The reaction temperature
should be 37°C.
The enzyme is best stored in 10 mM Tris-HC1, pH 8.0, 100 mM
NaC1, 2.5 mM MgC12, 0.5 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT, and 50% glycerol
(15). It is stable if stored undiluted in this buffer at -20°C for
several months.
5. T7 DNA Polymerase
This DNA polymerase is also produced by bacteriophage-infected
E. coli, although it is now obtained from a cloned gene.
5.1. Enzyme Data
It is the only common DNA polymerase that consists of more than
one subunit. The functional enzyme is composed of the T7 gene 5
protein (mol mass 80,000-85,000 Da), which carries all the enzymic
activities, plus the E. coli thioredoxin protein (mol mass 12,000 Da)
required to associate with the template.
The enzyme has a very active 5'-3' polymerase activity that can
incorporate 300 nucleotides/s. It is also the most highly processive of
all the DNA polymerases in that it can extend a primer for several
kilobases without the enzyme dissociating from the template. The
enzyme is also very tolerant of nucleotide analogs, which renders it
very useful for DNA sequencing and oligolabeling techniques.
T7 DNA polymerase lacks a 5'-3' exonuclease activity (16), but like
T4 DNA polymerase, it has a potent 3'-5' exonuclease. In this case, the
activity is 1000-fold that exhibited by Klenow fragment. The 3'-5'
exonuclease activity can be inactivated by incubation with a reducing
agent, oxygen, and low concentrations of Fe E+ . This modification does
not affect the polymerization ability of the enzyme (17). Chemical
modification removes 99% of the exonuclease activity, and total removal
has been achieved by genetic engineering. These modified
versions of T7 DNA polymerase are readily available commercially.DNA Polymerase 27
5.2. Uses ofT7 DNA Polymerase
A major use of native or modified T7 DNA polymerase is in DNA
sequencing when fragments of over 1,000 bases can be analyzed from
one reaction. The enzyme is also useful for other applications when
extension of a primer over long stretches of template are required. The
other uses of this enzyme include the rapid end-labeling of DNA probes
and the extension of primers during site-directed mutagenesis.
5.3. Experimental Procedures
A suitable reaction buffer for T7 DNA polymerase is 40 mM Tris-
HC1, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgC12, 1 mM DTT, 100 Jxg/mL BSA, 300 JaM
dNTPs (18), and reactions should be performed at 37°C. The enzyme
is stable for over 6 mo when stored at -20°C in 25 mM Tris-HC1, pH
7.5,250 mM NaC1, 5 mM DTT, and 50% glycerol.
6. Taq Polymerase
Taq polymerase is a DNA polymerase isolated from the bacterium
Thermus aquaticus (19). Similar enzymes have been isolated from
other thermophilic organisms, including Thermus thermophilus, Th.
flavus, Th. litoralis, Pyrococcus furiosus, and Bacillus stearothermophilus.
Taq polymerase preparations have been isolated from
several different strains of Th. aquaticus itself, and each has slightly
different characteristics. The most common source is still strain YT-
1, although the enzyme is also available from recombinant clones.
6.1. Enzyme Data
Taq polymerase is a monomeric enzyme with a mol mass in the range
60,000-97,000 Da depending on the source. The enzyme exhibits a 5'-3'
polymerase activity with a high processivity and lacks a 3'-5'exonuclease
(proofreading) activity, but does possess a 5'-3' exonuclease (strand
replacement) activity. A modified form of the enzyme is now available
from which this latter activity has been removed. DNA polymerases
from Thermus litoralis and Pyrococcusfuriosus do exhibit the 3'-5' exonuclease
activity (20;21), which renders DNA replication less error-prone.
Taq polymerase has another activity in that it can incorporate an
additional nucleotide (usually deoxyadenosine) at the 3' terminus of
any DNA duplex in a nontemplate-dependent reaction (22). This addition
often hinders subsequent manipulations, but can be turned to
advantage as a means of increasing cloning efficiency (23).28 Maunders
The major distinguishing feature of Taq polymerase is its extreme
thermal stability. The enzyme can withstand temperatures in excess of
95°C for prolonged periods, and in fact, its optimum for reaction is
75°C. The rate of reaction is reduced to 50% at 60°C, and to 10% at
37°C. A range of DNApolymerases from other species ofthermostable
bacteria (including those mentioned earlier) are now becoming available,
which will broaden the spectrum of possible reaction conditions.
6.2. Uses ofTaq Polymerase
Taq polymerase is rapidly replacing other DNA polymerases in
many laboratory techniques, primarily because of its thermal stability
and tolerance of temperature changes. This feature allows reactions to
be performed at elevated temperatures, whereby DNA duplex melting
and annealing can be rigorously controlled. This ensures the presence
of a suitable single-stranded template for high-fidelity replication, and
also the stringency of primer association can be precisely defined.
Additional benefits are that contaminating enzyme activities are largely
eradicated, and complex but routine procedures can be automated.
The major use of Taq polymerase at present is in the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) (24). This technique is a simple method of amplifying
minute quantities of DNA for a variety of subsequent procedures,
including cloning, sequencing, hybridization, and genome
mapping (25). The enzyme from Thermus thermophilus (when used in
a manganese-containing buffer) has an additional reverse transcriptase
activity, which extends the use of PCR directly to cDNA synthesis.
The PCR has applications beyond the reseach laboratory, including
uses in forensic science, disease diagnosis or prognosis, paternity testing,
and in animal and plant breeding programs.
Another use of Taq polymerase is directly in DNA sequencing,
where the high temperatures employed help reduce problems caused
by secondary structure in the template and allow an increase in the
stringency of primers used. Taq polymerase has, for the reasons mentioned
earlier, become a very important tool for the molecular biologist
and is described in detail in Chapter 4.
References
1. McHenry, C. S. (1988) DNA Polymerase HI holoenzyme of Escherichia coli.
Ann. Rev. Biochem. 57, 519-550.CHAPTER 4
Taq Polymerase (EC 2.7.7.7)
With Particular Emphasis on Its Use in PCR Protocols
Axel Landgraf and Heiner Wolfes
1. Introduction
Taq polymerase (EC 2.7.7.7) is a thermostable DNA-dependent DNA
polymerase that was first isolated in 1976 from Thermus aquaticus
strain YT-1 (ATTC # 25 104)(1). It catalyzes the template-directed
polymerization of dNTPs at high temperatures.
5'-dGdTdGdC Taq pol. 5'-dGdTdGdCdAdCdGdAdGdAdG
3'-dCdAdCdGdTdGdCdTdCdTdC -~ 3'-dCdAdCdGdTdGdCdTdCdTdC
+dNTPs
When Taq polymerase was isolated in 1976, nobody could have known
the impact the application of Taq polymerase to the polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) would have on molecular biology (2,3). In an issue of
Science in 1989, the enzyme was dubbed molecule of the year (4).
2. Enzymology of the Taq Polymerase
Taq polymerase constitutes only 0.01-0.02% of the total protein of
Thermus aquaticus. The increased demand for the enzyme led to the
cloning of the gene in E. coli. An advantage of cloning an enzyme from
a thermophile organism in a mesophile bacterium is that, in general,
contaminants in the enzyme preparation should not be active at a temperature
optimal for the Taq polymerase (5).
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, Vol. 16: Enzymes of Molecular Biology
Edited by: M. M. Burreil Copyright ©1993 Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
3132 Landgraf and Wollees
The sequence for the enzyme allowed a better characterization of
the Taq polymerase (5). Given the biochemical, biophysical, and sequence
data, it can be concluded that the two enzyme preparations published
in the original paper (1,5) represented either two different enzymes or
that the smaller protein was a fragment of the constitutive Taq polymerase.
The characteristic features of the commercially available cloned
Taq polymerase are analogous to those of the latter protein.
The Taq polymerase gene is 2499 nucleotides long and codes for a
protein of 832 amino acids. The theoretical mass is 93,900 Da, which
is in fairly good agreement with the apparent mass of 97,300 Da obtained
from gel electrophoresis. A sequence comparison with polymerase I
from E. coli shows significant similarities in the 5'-3' exonuclease
domain (amino acids 1-410) as well as in the polymerase domain
(amino acids 410-832). Regions to which definite functions could be
assigned in polymerase I are highly conserved in Taq polymerase.
No proofreading activity (3'-5' exonuclease) could be identified in
Taq polymerase (6). There is no homology in Taq polymerase to a
domain ranging from amino acid 300 to 410 in polymerase I, to which
proofreading activity is attributed in the E. coli enzyme.
Taq polymerase catalyzes the DNA-dependent polymerization of
dNTPs. One unit of the enzyme is defined as the amount of enzyme
that will incorporate 10 nmol of radioactively labeled dTTP into acidinsoluble
material at 80°C in 30 min (1). The enzyme could be purified
to a specific activity of 200,000 U/mg protein. As an optimal reaction
temperature, 75-80 ° C was established, at which the incorporation rate is
approx 150 nucleotides/s/enzyme molecule (7). In the M 13 system, incorporation
rates of <60, 24, 1.25, and 0.25 nucleotides/s/enzyme molecule
were measured at 70, 55, 37, and 22°C respectively (8). Incorporation
rates decrease at temperatures >90°C; the stability of the enzyme also
decreases drastically. The half-life time of the enzyme declines from 130
to 40 to between 5 and 6 min at 92.5, 95, and 97.5°C respectively (7).
Enzyme activity is dependent on bivalent cations. Concentrations
of 2 mM MgCI 2 are optimal. Maximum polymerization rates are obtained
with 0.7-0.8 mM dNTPs. Substrate inhibition is observed at dNTP concentrations
of 4-6 mM. Monovalent cations also have an effect on the
activity of the enzyme. Optimum conditions are 50 mM KC1, whereas
inhibition is reported at concentrations >75 mM KC1 (8). NaC1, NH4C1,
and NH 4 acetate cannot substitute for KC1 without a decrease in specificTaq Polymerase 33
Table 1
Inhibitor Effects on Taq Polymerase I Activity ~
Inhibitor Concentration % Activity
Urea <0.5M 100
1.0M 118
1.5M 107
2.0M 82
SDS 0.001% 105
0.01% 10
0.1% <0.1
Ethanol <3 % 100
10% 110
DMSO <1% 100
10% 53
20% 110
DMF <5 % 100
10% 82
20% 17
aBased on results from ref. 7.
activity. Denaturating agents, detergents, and organic solvents in low
concentration are tolerated by Taq polymerase; at higher concentrations,
inhibition is observed.
A compilation of the effects of several substances is shown in Table 1.
These concentrations are not obligatorily applicable to the PCR; e.g.,
0.5M Urea are inhibitory to the PCR, whereas up to 1.5M Urea do not
alter the incorporation yields of Taq polymerase. The inhibition by
0.01% SDS can be reversed by adding 0.1% Tween 20 or NP40 (7).
Taq polymerase is an enzyme with high processivity (8). An absolute
requirement is a DNA template with a primer to initiate the reaction. The
primer must be dephosphorylated on the 3' end (7). Taq polymerase has
a strand displacement 5'-3' exonuclease activity. 5'-phosphorylated
oligodeoxynucleotides are not degraded by the 5'-3' exonuclease activity
of the enzyme. Studies of the fidelity of DNAsynthesis by Taq polymerase
revealed error rates of 1.1 x 10 -4 for misincorporation and 2.5 x 10 -5 for
frameshift mutations (6). An error rate of 2 × 10-4 was determined by PCR
experiments followed by sequencing (3) and by denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (9). T-C transitions are occurring more frequently than
other misincorporation errors (6,10).34 Landgraf and Wolfes
3. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
The first publication concerning the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
appeared in 1985 (2). In this protocol, Klenow polymerase was used
as the replicating enzyme, thus necessitating the addition of new polymerase
after each denaturation step. In 1988, the first use of Taq polymerase
for the PCR was reported (3), leading the way to an automation
of the protocol. The application of Taq polymerase to the PCR was the
basis for the success of the technique. The enzyme is extremely suitable
for the following reasons:
• Taq polymerase is stable up to 95°C; thus it is not necessary to replenish
the enzyme after each PCR cycle;
• The maximal enzyme activity is between the temperature range of 70-
75°C, which minimizes secondary structures of the template, resulting
in high polymerization yield; and
• The annealing temperature can be chosen from 30-70°C, allowing an
optimal adaptation of cycle parameters to appropriate annealing temperatures
of the primers; therefore, byproducts are hardly generated.
3.1. Fundamentals of the PCR
The PCR is an enzymatic chain reaction that leads to the amplification
of specific DNA sequences from a given template (11). In addition
to the template, two primers (typically: oligodeoxynucleotides of 20
nucleotides in length) are needed, whose sequence must be complementary
to the template DNA. The amplification is performed in the
presence of dNTPs as substrate and catalyzed by Taq polymerase. The
sequence between the two regions complementary to the primers is
doubled by repeating the cycle, which consists of a series of temperature
steps in which the DNA is denatured, the primers are annealed,
and the polymerization of the specific sequence occurs. The newly
synthesized sequence is available as template in the next cycle; therefore,
theoretically, a twofold increase of template is achieved in each
step. In theory, 30 cycles should yield an amplification of a specific
sequence by a factor of 230= 1 × 109, as long as substrates or enzyme
is not limiting (Fig. 1).
The PCR technique reaches outstanding results because of the fact
that the chain reaction requires the specific annealing of two primers
to a complementary sequence. Unspecific annealing of primers or
nicks in the template does not lead to exponential, but only linearTaq Polymerase 35
Cydel
Cyde2
Cycle 3
t Dan~urea nd annealp dmere
m
m
t Pdmeer 0dention
t Danalurean d annealp dmers
emm m
m
m
t Primeer xtention
t Denaturea nd annealp dmers
m
m
w m
m
mm
m e
m
m
m
t Palmer extention
umm
m
m
Fig. 1. Principle of the polymerase chain reaction.
amplification. Therefore, this system offers an optimal ratio between
specific and unspecific signal.
Characteristically, <1 lag of template in a vol of 100 ilL is used in the
PCR. In this experimental outline, a single copy gene of the human
genome would be in a concentration of 2.5 fM. Primers and enzyme are
used in large excess (1 pM and 1 nM, respectively). The efficiency of36 Landgraf and Wolfes
log Primer
incorporation
Efllcienc,
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0,8
Plateau phase
f I I 1
I I I I
10 20 30 40
Cycles
Fig. 2. Typical PCR. Changes in efficiency and product yield. Graphs were calculated
on the basis of: 1 IxM of each primer spanning a stretch of 300 bp, 200 ktM
each dNTP, 2 U enzyme 1 nM (processing 10 templates/cycle, estimated enzyme
degradation 5%/cycle); and 200-ng template (0.05 aMol single copy gene). Volume
of 100 ~L.
this reaction will be close to the theoretical value of 2, which means
that the sequence is doubled in every cycle. After 20-30 cycles are
completed, the product (and therefore the template) is amplified by a
factor of 106 . Now the template concentration is in the same order as
the enzyme concentration. The efficiency of the PCR decreases steadily,
and exponential growth is no longer observed (Fig. 2). This phase of
the reaction is called plateau phase (12). Hence, the product yield is
dependent on the enzyme concentration (13) (Fig. 3).Taq Polymerase 37
% primer incorporation
1,2
0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0
I1"
I I I I
1 2 3 4
U taq polymerase
Fig. 3. Dependency of primer incorporation on enzyme amounts. O, 22 cycles;
II, 24 cycles; A, 26 cycles.
The initial template concentration hardly influences the product
yield in the plateau phase. Even 1-10 copies of target sequence will be
amplified to give the plateau concentration after 40-50 cycles. Under
the experimental conditions mentioned earlier, incorporation of 10-
100 nM primer can be expected, which corresponds to roughly 1 lag
DNA. Therefore, the amplification has to reach the plateau phase, if
the product is to be analyzed by gel electrophoresis and ethidium
bromide staining.
The PCR is applicable for quantitative determinations only prior to the
onset of the plateau phase. Otherwise, quantitative analysis has to be
performed using competing primer pairs in an experiment (Section 4.7.).
The efficiency, defined as the amplification factor per cycle, has a
theoretical value of 2, in accordance with the doubling of the sequence
in every step. However, in practice, this is not achieved. The efficiency
is dependent on the copy number of the template: The lower the copy
number, down to a certain limit, the better the PCR works. An efficiency
close to the theoretical value (> 1.9) can only be expected with
copy numbers of the template in the range of 107-108 (14). Starting38 Landgraf and Wolfes
from this limit, the yield of the reaction is restricted by too low enzyme
concentration or by competitive reannealing of the fragments (12).
For the amplification of long fragments, the reaction efficiency is very
dependent on the fragment length: The efficiency of 1.9 for a fragment
of 1000 nucleotides declines to 1.4 for a fragment of 7 kb (15).
3.2. Application ofTaq Polymerase in the PCR
The application of Taq polymerase in the PCR requires certain prerequisites
to be fulfilled.
3.2.1. Buffers
The buffer used most commonly in the PCR consists of 10 mMTris-
HC1, pH 8.4, 50 mM KC1, 1.5-2.5 mM MgC12, and 0.01% gelatin as
stabilizer (2). The Mg 2÷ ion concentration influences predominantly
the specificity of the PCR. With increasing Mg 2÷ concentrations, the
amplification of unspecific sequences increases. At high dNTP concentrations,
it should also be taken into account that the concentration
of free ions is reduced as a result of Mg 2÷ binding to dNTPs and to
DNA. It was reported that, in an incorporation experiment, high dNTP
concentrations (4-6 mM) were inhibitory (8).
A different widely used buffer system is composed of 67 mM Tris-
HC1, pH 8.8, 6.7 mMMgCI 2, 16.6 mM [NH412SO4, 10 mM 13-mercaptoethanol,
and 0.02% bovine serum albumin (BSA) or gelatine. In principle,
gelatine should be given preference over BSA, because BSA is likely
to denature. On the other hand, in some protocols the use of stabilizing
proteins is totally abandoned (8). Sometimes 10% dimethylsulfoxide
(DMSO) is added to the buffers mentioned above (10).
The Michaelis Menten constant K m of Taq polymerase for each
dNTP has a value of 10-15 laM (16). A normal PCR experiment contains
50-200 1aM of each dNTP. This concentration is sufficient to
amplify even large fragments to microgram yields without any limitation
of dNTP substrate. Even after 60 cycles, a pool of about 50%
dNTPs is still available (8). Sometimes the dNTP concentration is
lowered to 10 kVk/in order to achieve an optimum incorporation of
radioactive labeled deoxynucleotides (17). Modified nucleotides, e.g.,
deoxynucleoside-t~-thiotriphosphates (dNTPaS) (18), 7-deaza-2'-
deoxyguanosine-5'-triphosphate d(cTGTP) (8), 5-Biotin (11)-2'
deoxyuridine-5'- triphosphate (Bio 1 1 dUTP) (16), are incorporated at
high rates by Taq polymerase.Taq Polymerase 39
3.2.2. Primer
In theory, at least a 16 bp of primer are necessary for an unambiguous
hybridization to a given stretch of DNA in the human genome (3
× 109 bp). In practice, primers 20-25 nucleotides long are used in PCR
experiments, with the G-C content varying from 40-60% in order to
ensure specific amplification. Primers shorter than 20 nucleotides are
used successfully for allele-specific hybridization (19). Except for
this purpose, utilization of shorter primers should be avoided, since
they might detach from the template at the high temperature where
polymerization is effective.
To determine the approximate melting temperatures of a primer-
DNA duplex, the equation:
Tm [°CI = 2[T + A] + 4[G + C]
can be used (20). More exact numbers can be calculated by applying
algorithms (21) that take the occurrence of intramolecular interactions,
e.g., hairpin structures, into account.
In established oligodeoxynucleotide synthesis, a product yield of
more than 80% for short primers can be expected (20). Therefore, a
purification of the crude synthesis products is most often not required.
Depending on circumstances, which demand purification of the crude
products, e.g., an oligodeoxynucleotide has to be labeled prior to the
PCR, two methods are suitable for purification: (1) When little amounts
of primers are needed, denaturing PAGE with 7M urea followed by
detection by shadow casting (22) is a convenient method for purification.
Several oligodeoxynucleotides can be purified in parallel. Since
urea is an inhibitor of Taq polymerase, it must be removed by chromatographic
techniques after elution from the gel slice. (2) Chromatographic
procedures are a better choice for the purifications of large
quantities of oligodeoxynucleotides. Reversed-phase HPLC techniques
and ion-exchange chromatography are commonly used (23).
Primers should always be stored lyophilized in aliquots at-20"C. It
is convenient to prepare 10X stock solutions with 1-10 gM concentrations
of the primer. A primer concentration of 0.1-1 laM is optimal for
the PCR. An increase in the oligodeoxynucleotide concentration will
produce a rise in nonspecific bands. One example of the production of
an unspecific band is owing to partial primer duplex formation and polymerization
and leads to a product of less than the length of the two primers.40 Landgraf and Wolfes
/N
Standard
Mismatch (32)
Ruorescent label (26)
Biotin label (14)
G G
A A
T T
C C
GC - stretch (33)
consensus sequence (34,35)
Fig. 4. Versatility of PCR primers.
Apparently, primer pairs are formed and elongated by the enzyme (24).
Biased primer concentration results in asymmetric amplification of one
strand (25) (Section 4.3.).
PCR is capable of dealing with many different problems by utilization
of primers specifically designed for a particular purpose (Fig. 4). Primers
carrying a chemical label at the 5' end, e.g., oligodeoxynucleotides substituted
with a biotin or fluorescent dye, are well accepted by Taq polymerase.
Oligodeoxynucleotides can be synthesized with a primary amino
group (aminolink) at the 5' end, to which biotin (14) or fluorescent markers
(26) may be coupled. As a consequence, 5' biotinylated primers offer
the option to exploit avidin-coupled dye reactions as well as the immobilization
of PCR products via an avidin (14) or streptavidin bridge (27) to
a matrix. The use of fluorescent primers offers a variety of applications in
qualitative and quantitative analysis, e.g., nonisotopic sequencing reactions
(28,29) or color coupling tests (30).
A perfect homology to the target sequence is not a conditio sine qua
non for primers, although a high degree of sequence homology is
necessary. Taking into account that the enzyme is working downstream
from the 3' end of the primer, only the last three bases adjacent
to this region need to be correctly base paired, in order to initiate
polymerization (31). The 5' region of the primer is less sensitive toTaq Polymerase 41
base mismatches. Therefore, new restriction sites can easily be introduced
into an amplification product (32). It is also possible to use
primers elongated by a stretch of 40 GC bp (33). Successful amplification
of sequences derived from known amino acid sequences utilizing
primers with mixed bases at one position has been reported (34, 35).
3.2.3. Template
Normally, very much less than 1 ktg DNA is used for an experiment.
The sensitivity of the method allows a dilution of the sample down to
the theoretical limit of 1 molecule/test, even for routine diagnostics
(36,37). The requirements for DNA purity are rather modest. Intact
cells may be used; they are lysed during the first denaturation step of
the PCR procedure. Some authors recommend a proteinase K digest in the
presence of nonionic detergents in order to render the DNA more accessible
(38). However, there is no advantage to employing higher concentrations
of template; this will make a contamination with inhibitors more
likely. Without any DNA isolation, amplification of bacterial sequences
is feasible directly by incubating 1 × 103 cells at 95°C for 10 min (39). At
higher cell concentrations, the PCR is inhibited. Hematin (hemin) has also
been found to inhibit the PCR at levels as low as 0.8 ~/(38). Therefore,
only nuclear fractions from whole blood samples should be analyzed
by the PCR. The sensitivity of the technique allows the amplification of
degraded DNA from very old, but well-preserved samples (40). Apreceding
reverse transcription in the same buffer system permits the direct
amplification of RNA sequences (41,42) (Section 4.2.).
3.2.4. Taq Polymerase
Taq polymerase 1 is commercially available from several manufacturers
at a concentration of 5 U/ktL. One unit corresponds to 50 fmol
of enzyme (8). Taq polymerase lots from different suppliers may lead
to considerably different quantitative results. One to four units per
100-1aL reaction aliquot are sufficient to amplify a sequence to yield
amounts of DNA detectable by ethidium bromide staining. Larger
enzyme quantities will provoke the amplification of unspecific products
(3). If the denaturation temperature for double-stranded DNA is
optimal, enzyme damage can be minimized, and enzyme activity will
be present in the reaction mixture even after 50 or more cycles. The
enzyme dilution should always be made up freshly by pipeting from
stock solution into incubation buffer (Section 3.2.6.).42 Landgraf and Wolfes
9O
temp
[*c]
70
50
Primer
Template
Denaturation Annealing
/
time [min]
Fig. 5. Typical PCR temperature protocol.
Polymerisation
3.2.5. Thermocycler
The PCR reaction requires a repeated cycling through temperature
profiles (Fig. 5). Sample volumes of 20-100 lxL are used in small reaction
tubes, which will facilitate the heat transfer from the incubation device.
Temperature control is usually achieved by automated thermocyclers:
• Water bath devices;
• Heating blocks with conventional electrical heating and liquid cooling
systems; or
• Heating based on other technologies, e.g., Peltier elements or fan heating.
It is the main feature of the devices to generate fast temperature
shifts in the range of 30-95°C. Deviations concerning block uniformity
or precision in repeated cycles of more than 1 °C are not tolerable.
A prerequisite for allele-specific amplification experiments is a highly
reproducible annealing temperature.
With regard to the adaptation of published protocols to a specific
thermocycler, it is very important to consider the way the actual temperature
is determined and regulated. Three principles can be distinguished:Taq Polymerase 43
• Temperature assessment in the heating block: (a) the time reading starts,
when the desired value in the block is reached or (b) the time reading
starts independently of the effective temperature of the block;
• Temperature assessment in a reference vial: the time reading starts, when
the rated temperature in the reference is reached; and
• Temperature assessment in water baths: the time reading is independent
of the actual sample temperature.
Different from the programmed temperature profile of the heating
block, the actual profile in the reaction vial is distinctly more shallow,
since the heat transfer through the material of the vessel is fairly bad.
For a successful PCR experiment, a set of defined temperatures
must be adjusted:
• To denature the template, 90-95°C must be reached for a short interval.
Prolonged incubation times at this temperature will lead to severe enzyme
losses by degradation. It was demonstrated (43) that complete strand separation
is not a necessary condition for annealing, rather, a partial melting
of the strands is sufficient to permit hybridization of the primers.
• The annealing temperature must be attained for a few seconds only.
At a primer concentration of 1 /aM, the half-life time of the templateprimer
hybrid is not more than 0.4 s at a temperature 20°C below the
T m value (44).
• As mentioned earlier, the incorporation rate of the enzyme is 60-150
nucleotides/s at 70-75°C; thus, a few seconds are adequate for the
amplification of sequences shorter than 1000 nucleotides. An incubation
time of 1 min/1000 nucleotides of sequence length is a good rule of
thumb, when sequences exceeding a length of 1000 nucleotides or more
are to be amplified (24).
3.2.6. Standard PCR Protocol
Following this protocol, a product band should be detectable from
a single copy gene. Prepare the following solution in a final volume of
30-100 lxl_,:
• I lag Genomic DNA as template;
• 1 ~tM Primers, 20-25 bp in length, flanking a sequence of 100-1000 bp;
• 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.4;
• 50 mM KCI;
• 1.5 mMMgCI2;
• 0.01% Gelatine; and
• 200 pM of each dNTP.44 Landgraf and Wolfes
Top this mixture carefully with paraffin oil, incubate at 95°C for 3
min, add 1-4 U of Taq polymerase/100 paL reaction vol, and repeat 30
cycles (temperature measurement in the heating block) of:
• 1 min at 74°C;
• 1 min at 92°C; and
• 1 min at 50°C.
End the procedure with an incubation at 74°C for 3 min. Analyze a
10-gL aliquot on an agarose or PAGE gel; stain with ethidium bromide.
3.2. 7. Reliable PCR Experiments
In clinical diagnosis, reliability is the most important criterion for the
application of a test. The extreme sensitivity of the PCR requires high
standards for the conditions of operation. Even minor contaminations
with foreign DNA will render results uncertain. With this caveat in mind,
some precautions are necessary to avert false positive results (30).
• Separate all PCR materials and equipment from processes involved in
DNA isolation.
• Aliquot all buffer, dNTP, and primer stock solutions.
• Pipet the DNA last.
• Always process controls in parallel: (a) a negative control with all components,
but lacking the template, and (b) a positive control with a control
template in a concentration similar to the template under investigation.
• Perform only the minimum number of amplification cycles necessary
to detect the product. This is crucial for experiments in which the loss
of a band (e.g., demonstration of the deletion of particular a sequence)
has to be detected (45).
Recently, it was reported (46) that irradiation at 254 nm for 5 min
of the PCR mix lacking template and enzyme will reduce DNA contamination
by a factor of 105.
4. PCR Applications
As an overview, the next paragraphs will deal with the application of
the PCR. For more detailed information, see the literature cited (47--49).
4.1. PCR as a Standard Method
in Clinical Diagnosis
The scope of PCR application in clinical diagnosis ranges from
prenatal diagnosis for sickle cell anemia (2) to postmortem analysis ofTaq Polymerase 45
tissues of cancer metastases. We would like to restrict this chapter to
some examples with characteristic features of PCR application in
clinical diagnosis.
The reasons for the success of the PCR as a standard method in clinical
diagnosis are its outstanding sensitivity, reliability, and versatility. Diagnostic
screening for mutations by the PCR should always be complemented
with a statistical analysis; the probability of false diagnosis is on
the order of 1% for a single-locus analysis in single cells (50).
The extreme sensitivity of the technique can trace one target sequence
in a background of 105-106 cells (3). The PCR makes affirmative statements
on the genetic information of single somatic or sperm cells possible
(36). In a serial examination, 700 different sperms were typified, demonstrating
a frequency of recombination of 0.16 in one individual (51). An
extension of this test series could allow the detection of recombination
frequencies <0.001; hence, data would be available that are more exact
than information from linkage analysis of pedigree studies.
Multiple gene loci can be amplified in parallel. Six domains of the
Duchenne Muscle Dystrophy (DMD) gene were amplified in a single
experiment (45). Thus, it is possible to monitor by PCR 70% of the
deletions in the 700-kb DMD gene. A simple test for 13-thalassemia
was developed by combining the PCR amplification with subsequent
dot blot hybridization to allele specific oligodeoxynucleotides (52).
The PCR was established to amplify fragments up to 3000 bp to amounts
detectable by staining (24,53). The amplification of larger fragments
is feasible, although with little efficiency: Hypervariable minisatellite
alleles up to 5-10 kb were faithfully amplified (15). Up to several micrograms
of product can be achieved by the PCR, amounts sufficient as
substrate in binding experiments, e.g., footprint analysis (54).
4.2. PCR Applications in Combination
with Nonradioactive Detection Techniques
The use of radioactive probes should be avoided in routine screening
tests. Even DNA of low abundance can be analyzed by the PCR
followed by restriction analysis of the products (55). The definite
sequence is enhanced to high copy numbers; therefore, radioactive
detection systems are dispensable. Product identification can be easily
done, for example, by hybridization to biotinylated oligodeoxynucleotides
and subsequent detection via avidin-linked enzymes (56).46 Landgraf and Wolfes
Allele-specific oligodeoxynucleotide (ASO) PCR (57) is based on
the fact that only fully complementary primers will initiate the reaction.
Therefore, amplification will be prohibited, if the complementary
sequence is deleted or mutated. A primer specific for the mutated
sequence is used as positive control. Point mutations, deletions, and
insertions in the a- 1-antitrypsin gene were monitored (58) with primers
harboring a 3' base mismatch with respect to the unmutated gene.
One 3' mismatch is necessary and sufficient to ensure reliable detection.
Primers bearing a mismatch located in the center of the primer
sequence are not suitable for allele-specific hybridization.
A different technique to find point mutations is competitive
oligodeoxynucleotide priming (COP)(19). When the annealing of a
primer mixture is performed at low stringency, the perfectly matched
primer will be favored with a level of discrimination greater than
100:1. An extension of COP and ASO-PCR involves the use of oligodeoxynucleotides
conjugated with a fluorescent dye marker; the products
are analyzed in a fluorimeter, hence rendering the electrophoretic
analysis obsolete (30,59).
4.3. Application of Specifically Designed Primers
For the reason that a primer needs to be complementary only at its
3' end to the sequence to be analyzed, mismatched primers can be of
advantage in introducing new restriction sites in the amplified product.
The product can be traced by restriction enzyme analysis even at
high background (55). Also, the fragment produced can be cloned
readily, one more benefit of this method (32).
Sometimes it is difficult to detect a single mutation in longer fragments
using denaturation gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). This
drawback can be overcome by attachment of a 40-bp GC-rich stretch
to the primers (60). The analysis of the PCR product, melting at a
higher temperature, will enhance the sensitivity of this method.
Mixed oligodeoxynucleotide primers designed on the basis of the amino
acid sequence of urate oxidase were used successfully to clone the gene
for this enzyme (34). If the primers crosshybridize to repetitive sequences,
even an optimal adaptation of the annealing temperature will not eliminate
unspecific bands. In this case, the amplification products can be
diluted and reamplified with a second set of primers (61,62). The use of
dc7GTP in a ratio of 3:1 over GTP is recommended to improve the PCR
of sequences with distinct secondary structures (8,63).Taq Polymerase 47
Normally, it is a prerequisite for the PCR to know the sequences
flanking the region to be amplified. Different methods were developed
to circumvent this drawback: Circularization of DNA fragments and
subsequent cleavage in one known site result in a constellation, where
an unknown region is flanked by sequenced regions (64).
Normally, the PCR is applied to generate well-defined sequences.
Whole genome PCR involves the ligation of oligodeoxynucleotides
prior to the amplification, and constitutes a pool of material for further
manipulation (65). With this technique, possible pitfalls in microcloning
of dissected chromosome fragments could also be bypassed. After the
ligation of oligodeoxynucleotides to restriction fragments, the DNA
was amplified and cloned in high yields (66, 67).
Ligation of known sequences to chemically cleaved DNA templates
and subsequent PCR amplification allows a specific in vivo footprint
analysis (68) as well as detection of methylation patterns (69). The
principles of this ligation-mediated PCR application are depicted in
Fig. 6. Random cleavage sites are generated in genomic DNA using
Maxam-Gilbert chemistry. The strands are denatured, and a genespecific
primer is annealed and extended with DNA polymerase.
Oligodeoxynucleotide linkers are blunt-end ligated to the doublestranded
products. The linker-ligated fragments are amplified with the
PCR and analyzed on sequencing gels.
4.4. Amplification of mRNA
The amplification of RNA is performed on a cDNA template produced
by reverse transcriptase. A small and not very efficient reverse
transcriptase activity was detected in Taq polymerase (70). Molony
Murine Leukemia Virus (MMLV) reverse transcriptase requires buffer
conditions similar to Taq polymerase. Therefore, after addition ofpoly
dT or sequence-specific primers and reverse transcriptase, the PCR
can be executed directly in the same vial (71). Avian Myeloblastosis
Virus (AMV) reverse transcriptase and Taq polymerase may also be
added together to the RNA; the reactions will be started subsequently
by choosing the proper reaction temperatures (42).
Starting with cDNA, fragments as long as 1.6 kb could be cloned (72).
The extreme sensitivity of the PCR allows semiquantitative recordings on
specific mRNA content of single cells (73). Eleven out of 12 patients
suffering from chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) who underwent
bone marrow transplantation still produced transcripts specific for CML.48 Landgraf and Wolfes
Single strand breaks are generated In a footprintlng experiment or
using Maxam Gilbert chemistry
I
Annealing of gene specific pdmers and
extenUon with DNA polymerase |
V
I
T4 Iigase mediated blunt end Ilgatlon
of ollgodeoxynucleotide linkers [
t f~ ( I ' l
I ( ( ( I
PCR amplification I
I { { i
h" ( ¢ l
i t c d
i { ( 1 1
| ¢ ( d
I ( ¢ a
l . . .. ,a
Sequencing gel
Fig. 6. Application of PCR to in vivo footprinting and detection of methylation pattern.
Although the patients were cytogenetically inconspicious even 3-6 yr
after surgery, CML-specific transcripts could be detected by PCR of the
reverse transcribed RNA (74).
If the boundaries of genes are not exactly known, ligation of specific
sequences to the cDNA will render an amplification feasible. Primers
complementary to the ligated oligodeoxynucleotides permit the PCRTaq Polymerase 49
of unknown sequences. This method is termed "anchor PCR" (75-77).
An alternative to eDNA synthesis is a combination of consecutive
RNA-DNA hybridization, S 1 nuclease digest, and PCR. This technique
was applied successfully to trace CML-specific transcripts (78).
4.5. Sequencing of PCR Products
Sequencing PCR-amplified products is a time-saving procedure in
the analysis of genes. No time-consuming cloning of DNA is necessary.
On the contrary, errors made by Taq polymerase will lead to false
sequence information, if cloned PCR products are sequenced (3).
Sequencing revealed that, in 22 clones created from amplified DNA,
none had a faultless sequence (10). In a direct sequencing reaction of
amplified DNA, on the average, these shortcomings will not become
visible. Double-strand sequencing of a single copy gene was utilized
to typify mutations in the globin gene (79).
In order to increase the efficiency ot the sequencing reaction, diverse
strategies were developed aimed at yielding single-stranded DNA (80).
When biased primer concentrations are used, a phase of normal PCR will
precede a reaction producing dominantly single-stranded DNA (8,25). A
well-balanced ratio of the primer concentration is crucial. If the primer
concentration is too low, too little DNA will be available for single-strand
synthesis. On the other hand, the ratio of single-stranded to double-stranded
product will be inferior at primer concentrations that are too high. In
experiments working with asymmetric primer concentrations, the PCR
efficiency decreases to a factor of 1.7 as compared to amplifications with
stoichiometrlc concentrations.
Single-stranded DNA can be recovered by affinity chromatographic
purification after amplification with biotinylated primers (27). In an
elegant experiment (81), a phage promoter was attached 5' onto at least
one of the PCR primers. The amplified segments were transcribed into
RNA and sequenced with reverse transcriptase. Another way to generate
single-stranded DNA involves a 5'-phosphorylated primer and
phage ~, exonuclease, which specifically attacks double-stranded DNA
only if there is a 5' terminal phosphate (82). With the dideoxy sequencing
method, single copy genes can easily be sequenced with fluorescent
dye-labeled primers (29). As an alternative, Maxam-Gilbert sequencing
of PCR products (83) or sequencing after incorporation of dNTPa~S
during the PCR is possible (18). When fluorescent dye-labeled primers
are utilized, the cleavage products can be sequenced directly (28).50 Landgraf and Wolfes
In the plateau phase of the reaction, the processivity of Taq polymerase
decreases at excess template concentrations. This phenomenon
is exploited in a very simple DNA sequencing method, where
phosphothioates are incorporated into the newly synthesized DNA.
The product is digested with snake venom phosphodiesterase and
analyzed on a sequencing gel. No product purification is necessary
applying this technique (84).
4.6. PCR and Site-Directed Mutagenesis
High yields of the desired mutations can be produced, when mismatched
primers are employed in the PCR (85). Deletions, insertions,
and mutations were created in plasmids with the support of mismatched
primers and PCR (86). Furthermore, these primers may generate a new
restriction site, serving as an option to introduce amplified fragments
with the cassette method.
Amplification of the whole plasmid offers the opportunity to introduce
mutations in the absence of restriction sites (53); partial deletions
in the plasmid are also feasible (87). In 70% of the amplified plasmids,
3' additions of one base not present in the template were observed.
Prior to cloning, these protruding ends had to be removed by the Klenow
fragment of DNA polymerase to restore the gene sequence (53). The
PCR has proved useful in the precise gene fusion at any chosen location
(88). Sequencing of mutant clones after mutagenesis is
compulsory, given the relatively high error rate of Taq polymerase
(1.1 × 10 -.4 [6], 2 x 10 -4 [3,9)1). At least 20% of the clones derived
from a 250-bp fragment amplified 106-fold will contain one error in
the sequence (cf Fig. 7).
4. 7. Quantitative Interpretation of PCR Results
Standard PCR in itself is not a quantitative method, when the plateau
is reached. For a quantitative interpretation of PCR experiments,
low cycle numbers and template concentrations below enzyme concentrations
are optimal, i.e., conditions where amplification is not
restricted by limiting parameters prevailing in the plateau phase.
Hybridization of 32p-labeled oligodeoxynucleotides revealed a linear
correlation between template DNA and detected signal, provided that
500--4000 copies of DNA as template and 30 amplification cycles
were used (17). In order to increase the incorporation rate, the dNTP
concentration was lowered to 10 JaM (Section 3.2.1.).Taq Polymerase
% faultless Sequences
100
51
80
60
40
20
I I I I I
1 2 3 4 5
[log] Amplification
Fig. 7. Dependence of error rate and fragment length.
In a technique referred to as differential PCR, alterations of genes
can be monitored when two genes are coamplified in one reaction
vessel. In this method, the primers are competing for the limiting
enzyme; therefore, gene copy numbers can be estimated semiquantitatively
even in the plateau phase of the PCR (89).
Quantitation of mRNA transcription in different cell types was
successfully performed using Southern hybridization to an internal
standard and to the amplified product (90). Monitoring antiviral therapy
benefits from the exceptional sensitivity of the PCR as well (91).
A test system where standards identical to the target sequence, except
for one restriction site, are coamplified provides an elegant way for the
absolute determination of mRNA amounts. Consequently, both signals
are enhanced to the same extent; variations in the reaction efficiency
will not influence the result. After completion of the PCR, the
standard is cleaved and compared with the target sequence (43). An
alternative to blotting techniques is the utilization ofbiotinylated primers;
the PCR products are immobilized on avidin agarose and hybridized
to specific probes (14).
5. Sequencing with Taq Polymerase
Although Taq polymerase is considered often to be only useful for
the PCR, last but not least, it should be pointed out that the enzyme is
ideal for dideoxy sequencing, the reasons being:CHAPTER 5
Eukaryotic Nuclear RNA Polymerases
(EC 2.7.7.6)
Deborah tL Cook and Robert J. Slater
1. Introduction
DNA-dependent RNA polymerases (ribonucleoside triphosphate:
RNA nucleotidyltransferase, EC 2.7.7.6) catalyze the synthesis of RNA
from ribonucleoside triphosphates in the presence of a DNA template
and divalent cation (1).
ATP
CTP
GTP
UTP n
Mg 2+ or Mn 2÷
> RNA + (PPi) n
DNA template
DNA-dependent RNA polymerase
The RNA molecules are synthesized complementary and antiparallel
to one of the DNA strands in a 5' to 3' direction. The ribonucleotides
are covalentlyjoined together by internucleoside 3'to 5' phosphodiester
bonds with concomitant release of inorganic pyrophosphate.
In order for the polymerase to do this, it must "recognize" the beginning
of the DNA sequence to be transcribed within the double-stranded
template; insert the correct nucleotide residue into each position, as
determined by the template sequence; carry out synthesis, so that RNA
is synthesized from beginning to end as a consequence of one polymerase
binding event; and recognize termination signals in order to
end RNA synthesis at the appropriate point. To achieve all this, the
polymerase must be able to recognize regulatory sites on the DNA
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, Vol. 16: Enzymes of Molecular Biology
Edited by: M. M. Burrell Copyright ©1993 Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
5960 Cook and Slater
template and interact with protein factors that modulate the activity
of the enzyme. Several reviews have appeared on eukaryotic RNA
polymerases (2-4).
2. Biological Function
Bacterial RNA polymerase containing a single apo enzyme is responsible
for all the synthesis of RNA in the cell. There are approx 7000
RNA polymerase molecules present in an Escherichia coli cell, and
many of these are involved in transcription, although the actual number
depends on the growth conditions (5). The RNA polymerase best
characterized is that of E. coli, but its structure is similar in all other
bacteria studied. The holoenzyme has a mol mass of about 480,000 Da
and is made up of five subunits, a, 13, 13', o, and m, there being two
copies of o~ and one each of the others: ~x21313'o¢0. The holoenzyme can
be separated into two components, the apo enzyme (a21313'o)) and the
sigma factor (o). The sigma subunit of the E. coli polymerase has a
specific role as an initiation factor for transcription: It enables the
enzyme to find consensus promoter sequences. Only the holoenzyme
can initiate transcription; the sigma "factor" is then released, leaving
the core enzyme to undertake elongation. Thus, the core enzyme has
the ability to synthesize RNA on a DNA template; its affinity for DNA
is the result of electrostatic attractions, but is nonspecific. It is the
sigma factor that ensures correct transcription initiation involving the
stable binding of the RNA polymerase to the promoter (5). Eukaryotes,
however, contain multiple DNA-dependent RNA polymerases.
Those that transcribe nuclear genomes are generally referred to as
RNA polymerases I, II, and III transcribing rRNA, mRNA and tRNA,
and 5SrRNA, respectively (Table 1).
2.1. Properties
Eukaryotic RNA polymerases transcribe both double-stranded and
single-stranded DNA templates in vitro, and single-stranded templates
generally promote higher rates of transcription (6). RNA polymerases
of plants and animals are capable of initiating transcription at nicks in
the DNA template in vitro (3, 8). Purified eukaryotic RNA polymerases
are capable of some degree of selective binding and initiation of RNA
chains on deproteinized DNA templates (9,10), although this is nonspecific,
and in no case has the selectivity been correlated with a
promoter or initiation site. From a number of studies with animal cell-freeEukaryotic RNA Polymerases
Table 1
Properties of Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases a
61
Eukaryotic RNA polymerases
I II III
Cellular location
Transcription product
~-Amanitin sensitivity
(lag/mL required for
50% inhibition)
Subunit structure
Ionic strength optima
(NH4)2SO 4 M
Soluble enzyme
Chromatin-bound
enzyme
Mn2+/Mg 2+ activity ratio
Poly (dA/dT)/DNA activity
ratio
Chromatographic elution
(NH4)2SO 4 M
DEAE-Sephadex
DEAE-cellulose
Nucleolus Nucleoplasm Nucleoplasm
rRNA hnRNA tRNA
snRNA 5SrRNA
Nonsensitive Very sensitive Moderately
(0.01-0.05) sensitive
(5-1000)
Two large subunits 100,000-240,000
and several small subunits 10,000-95,000
0.03-0.05 0.025--0.1 0.04-0.01,
0.18-0.3
0.05-0.1 0.25-0.5 0.05-0.1
~5:1 -7:1 ~3:1
2:3 1:2 1:3
~0.1 -0.2 0.2-0.3
-0.1 -0.2 -0.1
~I'aken from refs. 1,4,6,7.
extracts, it is apparent that additional factors are required to obtain faithful
transcription in vitro, so the enzymes are not often used in their pure state
because they lack specificity. Eukaryotic RNApolymerases differ in subunit
structure, type of genome transcribed, chromatographic properties, divalent
cation, ionic strength optima, and ct-amanitin sensitivity. The poisonous
mushroom Amanita phalloides produces ct-amanitin, a bicyclic
octopeptide that blocks the elongation step of transcription by direct
interaction with RNApolymerases that differ in their sensitivity (Table 1).
RNA polymerase I is insensitive to the toxin, but is responsive to actinomycin
D, which binds to DNA preventing elongation. RNA polymerase
II is very sensitive and RNA polymerase III moderately so. Thus, the
various RNApolymerases I, II, and III are readily distinguished (Table 1).
Intact cells are not freely permeable to ot-amanitin; therefore, it is necessary
to use a whole-cell or nuclear extract.62 Cook and Slater
2.2. Ion Requirement
The requirement for a divalent cation by RNA polymerases indicates
binding of nucleotides to the enzyme as metal chelates, for example:
MgATP (11). The optimum divalent cation concentration is generally
in the range of 5-10 mM Mg 2÷ or 1-2 mM Mn 2÷ (2). In addition to the
above requirements, RNA polymerase activity is stimulated by the
inclusion of monovalent cations, such as (NH4)2SO 4, NH4C1, KC1, or
NaC1. This is especially evident when engaged RNA polymerases are
assayed in isolated nuclei or chromatin. With isolated plant or animal
nuclei, RNA polymerase I and III activity is most active at 0.05-0.10M
(NH4)2SO4, whereas RNA polymerase II activity is optimized at 0.25-
0.50M (12-15).
2.3. Structure
The nuclear RNA polymerases have a complex subunit structure.
Each has a mol mass of approx 500,000 Da and is made up of two large
subunits, each having a mol mass >100,000 Da, which seem to be
characteristic for each class of enzyme, and a number of smaller subunits,
with mol wt from 10,000 Da to just less than 100,000 Da (2,4).
The situation is further complicated by the phenomenon of
microheterogeneity within RNA polymerase classes (7).
3. Transcription Factors
The basic components required for efficient and accurately regulated
eukaryotic transcription initiation include two types of DNA
elements known as promoters and upstream regulatory sequences;
two sets of proteins known as general transcription factors and specific
or regulatory proteins, and the RNA polymerase enzyme. Transcription
can occur when the eukaryotic RNA polymerase recognizes
a preexisting DNA-protein complex. RNA polymerase II has four
general transcription factors associated with it; these have been partially
purified and designated TFIIA, B, D, and E (16-19). TFIIA is
required for the efficient interaction of TFIID with the promoter element
known as the TATA box (20,21), which is found in nearly all
eukaryotic promoters, with a consensus sequence "TATAAA" and
located approx 25-30 bp upstream of the transcription start site in
mammalian promoters (22-25). It has been shown that TFIIE specifiEukaryotic RNA Polymerases 63
cally interacts with RNA polymerase II and TFIIB (26,27). These
transcription factors range in mol mass from 25,000 Da for yeast (28)
to 76,000 Da for TFIIE (24).
Although promoters themselves are sufficient to direct basal level
gene expression, specific transcription requires the assistance of additional
transcription factors (29). These sequence-specific DNA binding
proteins are directly involved in the recognition of mRNA
transcription initiation in higher organisms; for example, CAT transcription
factor (CTF) is responsible for selective recognition of eukaryotic
promoters that contain the sequence CCAAT (30,31), whereas the
Sp 1 protein binding regions contain one or more GC boxes (GGGCGG),
which can be present in either orientation with respect to transcription.
Not all GC boxes bind Sp 1 with equal affinity, and sequences outside
the core hexanucleotide seem to modulate the efficiency of binding
(for review, see refs. 25,32).
In HeLa cell factor, termed the major late transcription factor or
upstream stimulatory factor, MLTF/USF binds to an upstream consensus
sequence GGCCACGTGACC, which functions in a bidirectional
manner. MLTF/USF may act synergistically with TFIID, since binding of
MLTF/USF enhances binding of TFIID (33, 34). The binding sequence
occurs in a number of cellular promoters, for example, mouse and rat
y-fibrinogen (35). Another promoter-specific transcription factor is
the heat shock transcription factor (HSTF). All maj or heat shock genes
contain multiple HSE (heat shock regulatory elements) with the consensus
sequence C--GAA--TCC-----G (36). In HeLacells, heat shock causes
more HSTF to bind to the HSE, whereas in yeast, HSTF binds constitutively
and heat shock causes HSTF to become phosphorylated (37).
3.1. In Vitro Transcription Systems
The development of methods for preparing soluble whole-cell and
nuclear extracts from mammalian cells (38-41) has led to a dramatic
increase in our understanding of the mechanistic details of complex
biochemical reactions, such as transcription, replication, and RNA
processing.
In vitro transcription systems were partially developed to study the
biochemical mechanisms of DNA-protein interaction, gene expression,
and regulation. To date, several cell-free transcription systems
have been developed, the first by Wu in 1978 (42); which demon64 Cook and Slater
strated accurate transcription of exogenous DNA by polymerase III,
and others such as those developed by Weil et al. (38); Manley et al.
(39); Dignam et al. (40); and Zerivitz and Akusjarvi (41).
The major advantage of soluble cell-free transcription systems is
that they can be fractionated by standard techniques in order to identify
those components involved in the transcription process (43). The
purified enzymes alone do not direct selective and accurate transcription
from purified DNA templates, but they appear to initiate and terminate
at a large number of sites, which may not be relevant to transcription
in vivo (3,4). The most extensive use of in vitro transcription systems
to date has been to study the structure of promoter sites and the transcription
factors needed to bring about selective transcription (44).
4. Experimental Procedures
4.1. TCA Precipitation Assay
This procedure can be used as an estimate of nucleoside triphosphate
incorporation into trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitable products
following an in vitro transcription reaction. 3H-UTP is usually the
radiolabel of choice. The reaction (as detailed in Section 4.2., but for
the substitution of 32p-labeled GTP with 1.0 ~tCi of 3H-UTP) is stopped
by the addition of 10% TCA. Acid-insoluble material is then collected
on glass fiber disks, washed twice with 5% TCA (with sodium pyrophosphate
to reduce nonspecific binding of the radiolabel), and finally
with alcohol to remove unincorporated radiolabel. The filters are dried
and the radioactivity estimated by using a scintillation counter; hence,
an estimation of nucleotide incorporation can be made (1).
4.2. Run-Off Transcription
RNA polymerase does not accurately terminate transcription in
vitro. One procedure therefore is to use as template a cloned gene
fragment that includes the promoter, but is truncated downstream.
Using the "run-off" assay system, the whole-cell or nuclear lysate,
DNA template, and radiolabeled (32p) nucleotide are incubated at 30°C
for 60 min. RNA is synthesized from the truncated DNA template and
analyzed electrophoretically to detect the species of RNA with the
predicted length.
A typical 50-]xL in vitro transcription reaction would contain the
following:Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases 65
• 20-30 gL Whole-cell or nuclear extract;
• 1-2.5 lag Template DNA;
• 500 I.tM each of ATP, CTP, and UTP;
• 4 mM Creatine phosphate;
• 50 ~tM Unlabeled nucleoside triphosphate (GTP)
• 10 ~tCi Labeled nucleoside triphosphate (32p-GTP specific activity).
The volume is made up to 50 ~L with sterile distilled water and incubated
at 30°C for 1 h. Suitable controls include omission of template
DNA or unlabeled nucleoside triphosphates, and addition of RNase or
o~-amanitin.
This system uses template DNA that has been cleaved by a restriction
enzyme cutting downstream from its putative start site. RNA
polymerases that transcribe this DNA will stop or "fall off" when they
reach the end of the DNA. If a substantial number of enzymes initiate
transcription at the same site, then a population of molecules will
migrate as a single band during gel electrophoresis. If DNA segments
cleaved by different restriction enzymes are used as templates in separate
reaction mixtures, the transcription start site can be deduced by
comparison of the sizes of RNAs produced; this can then be used for
promoter mapping.
4.3. Primer Extension
This method is commonly used to measure the precise 5' end of
transcripts, based on the fact that reverse transcriptase can transcribe
RNA into DNA. Therefore, a single-strand oligonucleotide of DNA
primer hybridized to RNA can be extended until the end of the RNA
is reached. Primer extension utilizes a primer of specific sequence to
determine the amount and length of a specific RNA. This sort of analysis
has been widely used to characterize mRNA made both in vivo and
in vitro (45).
Primer extension is used to map the 5' termini of an RNA transcript;
hence, the cap site of transcription can be determined. In addition, precursors
and processing intermediates of mRNA can be detected. A short
known fragment (30-80 bp) of DNA corresponding to a sequence near to
the anticipated cap site of the gene of interest is labeled at the 5' terminus;
this is termed the primer (a synthetic oligonucleotide or restriction fragment).
The test RNA, which has been digested with RNase-free DNase to
remove template DNA, can be synthesized in an in vitro transcription66 Cook and Slater
system (with the omission of the radiolabeled triphosphate, as described
in Section 4.2.) and hybridized with an excess of the single-stranded
DNA primer. The primer and the RNA are then incubated at 85°C for
10 min to denature the nucleic acids, and annealed by incubating at a
suitable temperature, for example, 55°C for 8-12 h. The exact temperature
needs to be optimized by preliminary experiments. The length
and GC content of the primer are used to determine the temperature of
annealing; the standard temperature of 55°C is suitable for a 20 base
oligonucleotide sequence with a GC content of approx 50% (46,47).
The primer:RNAhybrid is then dissolved in reverse transcriptase buffer,
approx 50 U of reverse transcriptase added to extend the primer to
produce a eDNA copy complementary to the RNA template and incubated
at 42°C for 90 min. If analyzing more than 10 lag of RNA in order
to prevent distortion of the sequencing gel, a RNase digestion is needed
at this stage.When the reverse transcriptase reaches the end of the
sequence (the cap site), it "falls off." The length of the resulting endlabeled
eDNA is measured by denaturing gel electrophoresis usually
on a DNA sequencing gel, hence, the sequence prior to the cap site can
also be determined.
Single-stranded DNA primers are preferred for experiments, since
they eliminate the formation of DNA:DNA hybrids and can be designed
to hybridize to specific sequences of the mRNA.
4.4. Nuclease $1 RNA Mapping
The enzyme S 1 nuclease degrades single-stranded DNA to yield 5'
phosphoryl mono or oligonucleotide (48). Primer extension cannot be
used to identify the 3' end of a transcript. Nuclease S 1 mapping is
therefore the method of choice for this purpose. The procedure was
originally described by Berk and Sharp in 1977 (49); it has been used
to map the location of 5' and 3' termini of mRNA or DNA templates,
and locate 5' and 3' splice points (50).
End-labeled RNA or DNA probes derived from various segments of
the genomic DNA are hybridized to mRNA favoring DNA:RNA hybrid
formation (51). Products of the hybridization are digested with nuclease
S 1 under conditions favoring single-stranded nucleic acid degradation
only. Then the products are analyzed by gel electrophoresis to
yield important quantitative and qualitative information about the
mRNA structure. The basic method is as follows: Probe and RNA areEukaryotic RNA Polymerases 67
mixed together, resuspended in hybridization buffer (40 mM PIPES
[pH 6.4], 1 mM EDTA [pH 8.0], 0.4MNaC1 and 50% formamide), and
incubated at 85°C for 10 min to denature the nucleic acids. Hybridization
follows for 12-16 h, but again the temperature is dependent on the
GC content of the DNA. Nuclease S 1 at 100-1000 U/mL and singlestranded
carrier DNA at 20 Bg/mL are then added for single-strand
digestion, but the temperature depends on the degree of digestion
required. Loops of DNA will be degraded at 20°C, and 37-45°C will
digest single-stranded regions of DNA:RNA hybrids. The reactions
are cooled to 0°C and nuclease stop mixture (containing carrier RNA
at 50 Bg/cm 3) added. The products can then be phenol:chloroform
extracted, and the nuclease S 1-resistant hybrids analyzed by alkaline
or neutral agarose gel electrophoresis. In the case where a radiolabeled
DNA probe has been chosen, this can be analyzed by electrophoresis
through a polyacrylamide/urea gel and an autoradiogram established.
A detailed description of nuclease-S 1 mapping was presented in a
review by Favalaro et al. in 1980 (52).
5. Cell and Nuclear Extracts
5. I. Soluble Cell Extract Transcription System
for RNA Polymerase II
A soluble transcription system is a cell extract that will faithfully
transcribe an exogenous DNA as template. For this, the extract should
contain all the necessary factors needed for the correct initiation and
elongation of the RNA chain, and be low in nuclease activity to prevent
degradation of the exogenous DNA template or transcription
products during the incubation. Establishing soluble systems provides
a starting point for the separation, isolation, and analysis of those
factors required (in addition to RNA polymerase) for accurate transcription
in vitro (45).
To date, many eukaryotic and viral genes have been sequenced, and
putative controlling sequences have been deduced. These observations
can be verified by in vitro manipulation of the DNA template and
then using the DNA in an in vitro transcription system to test the effect.
Weil et al. in 1979 (38) prepared a high-speed supernatant (S100)
cellular extract from cultured human cells. This S 100 extract can be
used for transcription experiments once supplemented with purified68 Cook and Slater
RNA polymerase II. RNA polymerase II from wheat germ does not
function in this system, indicating that it is a combined effect of RNA
polymerase II and specific factors that mediate accurate and selective
transcription. Fractionated S 100 does contain multiple factors required
for accurate transcription by purified RNA polymerase II (16,22).
5.2. HeLa Whole Cell Lysate (39)
The extract is prepared by gentle lysis of cells with a Dounce homogenizer.
Ammonium sulfate is added to approx 20% saturation, and the
nuclei lysed. Cell debris and broken nuclei are removed by centrifugation
at 175,000g for 3 h. Proteins in the supernatant are resuspended
and dialyzed for 12 h. The dialysate is centrifuged to remove insoluble
material, and supernatant removed to form the extract. This can be
stored in small aliquots with repeated thawing and refreezing for up to
1 yr at -70°C. The extract normally contains 6-30 mg/mL of protein.
The rate of RNA polymerase II elongation is approx 300 nucleotides/
min approx 1/10th that in vivo (53). The in vitro temperature of 30°C
should not be increased to 37°C, otherwise RNase degradation may
become a problem (39). The reaction mixture is detailed in Section 4.2.
Each whole cell extract must be characterized by DNA and extract
titration, since there is a threshold DNA concentration below which no
accurate transcription occurs and an inhibitory effect at high DNA
concentrations. Specific transcription can be obtained when the final
concentration of protein in the extract is in the range 6-18 mg/mL. The
extract contains high levels of 18S and 28S rRNA. Therefore, following
extraction, it is possible that only 50-75% of the sample may be loaded
onto the gel to avoid overloading. Since the extract is made from whole
cells, weak promoters may not be as easily detected, although this does
depend on the level of background nonspecific transcription occurring.
5.3. Nuclear Extracts from Human Cells (40)
The extract is prepared by isolating nuclei in hypotonic buffer, lysis
of cells with a Dounce homogenizer, extraction of the nuclei at 0.42M
NaC1, high-speed centrifugation to clear the supernatant, and concentration
of the extracted nucleic acids and various transcription factors
by ammonium sulfate precipitation. Since the nuclei are isolated at
very low ionic strength (0.01M KCI), retention of nuclear components
is facilitated and contaminating cytoplasmic proteins are discarded in
the supernatant following pelleting of the nuclei. Extraction at 0.42MEukaryotic RNA Polymerases 69
NaC1 appears to release all of the nuclear components required for
specific transcription, including RNA polymerase II, without releasing
tightly bound nuclear proteins that can inhibit specific transcription (40).
5.4. Nuclear Extract (41)
This method uses lysolecithin (a natural membrane lipid--lysophosphatidylcholine)
to disrupt plasma membranes and requires no detergents
or lysis with a Dounce homogenizer. Lysolecithin nuclear extracts
are said to be competent for RNA polymerase II and III transcription,
DNA replication, pre-mRNA splicing, and sequence-specific DNAprotein
binding. Nuclear extracts can be prepared on a small scale ( 107
cells), as well as for preparative purposes by this method.
Lysolecithin is highly toxic and cells lyse within 90 s. An extract
made from HeLa cells at a density of 4-6 x 105/mL provides a suitable
nuclear extract for in vitro transcription analysis. Using HeLa suspensions
at 108 cells/mL, 100% lysis can be obtained with a concentration
oflysolecithin at 300-800 gg/mL. In the protocol (41), a concentration
of 400 gg/mL was chosen.
References
1. Slater, R. J. (1987) In vitro transcription, in Techniques in Molecular Biology,
vol. 2 (Walker, J. M. and Gaastra, W., eds.), Groom Helm, London and Sidney,
pp. 203-227.
2. Jacob, S. T. (1973) Mammalian RNA polymerases. Prog. Nucleic Acids Res.
Mol. Biol. 13, 93-126.
3. Chambon, P. (1975)Eukaryotic nuclear RNA polymerases. Ann. Rev. Biochem.
44, 613-638.
4. Roeder, R. G. (1976) Eukaryotic nuclear RNA polymerases, in RNA Polymerase
(Losick, R. and Chamberlin, M., eds.), Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold
Spring Harbor, NY, pp. 285-329.
5. Chamberlin, M. (1982) Bacterial DNA-dependent RNA polymerases, in The
Enzymes, 3rd ed., vol. 15B (Boyer, P., ed.), Academic, New York, pp. 61-108.
6. Guilfoyle, T. J. (1983) DNA-dependent RNA polymerases of plants and lower
eukaryotes, in Enzymes of Nucleic Acid Synthesis and Modification, vol. 2 (Jacob,
S. T., ed.), CRC, Cleveland, OH, pp. 1-41.
7. Beebee, T. J. C. and Butterworth, P. H. W. (1981) Eukaryotic DNA-dependent
RNA polymerases: An evaluation of their role in the regulation of gene expression,
in Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, vol. 2 (Kolodny, G. M., ed.), CRC, Cleveland,
OH, pp. 1-56.
8. Chandler, D. W. and Gralla, J. (1980) Specific binding and protection of form II
SV40 deoxyribonucleic acid by ribonucleic acid polymerase II from wheat germ.
Biochemistry 19, 1604-1612.