at Many Lands: Ancient Egypt, by James Baikie
Project Gutenberg's Peeps at Many Lands: Ancient Egypt, by James Baikie This eBook is for the use of
anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.net
Title: Peeps at Many Lands: Ancient Egypt
Author: James Baikie
Illustrator: Constance Baikie
Release Date: September 29, 2007 [EBook #22799]
at Many Lands: Ancient Egypt, by James Baikie 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: ASCII
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PEEPS AT MANY LANDS: ANCIENT EGYPT
***
Produced by Geetu Melwani, Bruce Albrecht and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net
PEEPS AT MANY LANDS
ANCIENT EGYPT
[Illustration: PLATE 1. AN EGYPTIAN GALLEY.]
PEEPS AT MANY LANDS
ANCIENT EGYPT
BY REV. JAMES BAIKIE, F.R.A.S.
AUTHOR OF "PEEPS AT THE HEAVENS," "THE STORY OF THE PHARAOHS," "THE SEA KINGS
OF CRETE," ETC.
WITH SIXTEEN FULL-PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS, THOSE IN COLOUR BEING BY CONSTANCE N.
BAIKIE
A. & C. BLACK, LTD. 4, 5 & 6, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. 1916
* * * * *
First published October 1912 Reprinted January and April 1916
AGENTS
AMERICA THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 64 & 66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK
AUSTRALASIA OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 205 FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE
CANADA THE MACMILLAN COMPANY OF CANADA, LTD. ST. MARTIN'S HOUSE, 70 BOND
STREET, TORONTO
INDIA MACMILLAN & COMPANY, LTD. Macmillan Building, BOMBAY 309 BOW BAZAAR
STREET, CALCUTTA
Printed in Great Britain.
* * * * *
CONTENTS
at Many Lands: Ancient Egypt, by James Baikie 
CHAPTER PAGE
I. A LAND OF OLD RENOWN 1 II. A DAY IN THEBES 6 III. A DAY IN THEBES (continued) 11 IV.
PHARAOH AT HOME 17 V. THE LIFE OF A SOLDIER 24 VI. CHILD-LIFE IN ANCIENT EGYPT 33
VII. SOME FAIRY-TALES OF LONG AGO 41 VIII. SOME FAIRY-TALES OF LONG AGO (continued)
47 IX. EXPLORING THE SOUDAN 54 X. A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 59 XI. EGYPTIAN BOOKS 66
XII. TEMPLES AND TOMBS 72 XIII. AN EGYPTIAN'S HEAVEN 82
* * * * *
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
PLATE
*1. AN EGYPTIAN GALLEY, 1500 B.C. Frontispiece
FACING PAGE
2. THE GODDESS ISIS DANDLING THE KING 9
3. THE GREAT GATE OF THE TEMPLE OF LUXOR, WITH OBELISK 16
*4. RAMSES II. IN HIS WAR-CHARIOT--SARDINIAN GUARDSMEN ON FOOT 25
*5. ZAZAMANKH AND THE LOST CORONET 32
6. GRANITE STATUE OF RAMSES II. 35
7. NAVE OF THE TEMPLE AT KARNAK 38
*8. "AND THE GOOSE STOOD UP AND CACKLED" 41
*9. AN EGYPTIAN COUNTRY HOUSE 48
10. STATUES OF KING AMENHOTEP III. 51
11. THE SPHINX AND THE SECOND PYRAMID 54
*12. A DESERT POSTMAN 57
*13. THE BARK OF THE MOON, GUARDED BY THE DIVINE EYES 64
14. GATEWAY OF THE TEMPLE OF EDFU 73
15. WALL-PICTURES IN A THEBAN TOMB 80
*16. PHARAOH ON HIS THRONE 20
Sketch-Map of Ancient Egypt on page viii
* These eight illustrations are in colour; the others are in black and white.
CHAPTER PAGE 3
* * * * *
[Illustration: SKETCH-MAP OF ANCIENT EGYPT.]
ANCIENT EGYPT
CHAPTER PAGE 4
CHAPTER I
"A LAND OF OLD RENOWN"
If we were asked to name the most interesting country in the world, I suppose that most people would say
Palestine--not because there is anything so very wonderful in the land itself, but because of all the great things
that have happened there, and above all because of its having been the home of our Lord. But after Palestine, I
think that Egypt would come next. For one thing, it is linked very closely to Palestine by all those beautiful
stories of the Old Testament, which tell us of Joseph, the slave-boy who became Viceroy of Egypt; of Moses,
the Hebrew child who became a Prince of Pharaoh's household; and of the wonderful exodus of the Children
of Israel.
But besides that, it is a land which has a most strange and wonderful story of its own. No other country has so
long a history of great Kings, and wise men, and brave soldiers; and in no other country can you see anything
to compare with the great buildings, some of them most beautiful, all of them most wonderful, of which Egypt
has so many. We have some old and interesting buildings in this country, and people go far to see cathedrals
and castles that are perhaps five or six hundred years old, or even more; but in Egypt, buildings of that age are
looked upon as almost new, and nobody pays very much attention to them. For the great temples and tombs of
Egypt were, many of them, hundreds of years old before the story of our Bible, properly speaking, begins.
The Pyramids, for instance, those huge piles that are still the wonder of the world, were far older than any
building now standing in Europe, before Joseph was sold to be a slave in Potiphar's house. Hundreds upon
hundreds of years before anyone had ever heard of the Greeks and the Romans, there were great Kings
reigning in Egypt, sending out their armies to conquer Syria and the Soudan, and their ships to explore the
unknown southern seas, and wise men were writing books which we can still read. When Britain was a wild,
unknown island, inhabited only by savages as fierce and untaught as the South Sea Islanders, Egypt was a
great and highly civilized country, full of great cities, with noble palaces and temples, and its people were
wise and learned.
So in this little book I want to tell you something about this wonderful and interesting old country, and about
the kind of life that people lived in it in those days of long ago, before most other lands had begun to waken
up, or to have any history at all. First of all, let us try to get an idea of the land itself. It is a very remarkable
thing that so many of the countries which have played a great part in the history of the world have been small
countries. Our own Britain is not very big, though it has had a great story. Palestine, which has done more
than any other country to make the world what it is to-day, was called "the least of all lands." Greece, whose
influence comes, perhaps, next after that of Palestine, is only a little hilly corner of Southern Europe. And
Egypt, too, is comparatively a small land.
It looks a fair size when you see it on the map; but you have to remember that nearly all the land which is
called Egypt on the map is barren sandy desert, or wild rocky hill-country, where no one can live. The real
Egypt is just a narrow strip of land on either side of the great River Nile, sometimes only a mile or two broad
altogether, never more than thirty miles broad, except near the mouth of the river, where it widens out into the
fan-shaped plain called the Delta. Someone has compared Egypt to a lily with a crooked stem, and the
comparison is very true. The long winding valley of the Nile is the crooked stem of the lily, and the Delta at
the Nile mouth, with its wide stretch of fertile soil, is the flower; while, just below the flower, there is a little
bud--a fertile valley called the Fayum.
Long before even Egyptian history begins, there was no bloom on the lily. The Nile, a far bigger river then
than it is now, ran into the sea near Cairo, the modern capital of Egypt; and the land was nothing but the
narrow valley of the river, bordered on either side by desert hills. But gradually, century by century, the Nile
cut its way deeper down into the land, leaving banks of soil on either side between itself and the hills, and the
mud which it brought down in its waters piled up at its mouth and pressed the sea back, till, at last, the Delta
CHAPTER I 5
was formed, much as we see it now. This was long before Egypt had any story of its own; but even after
history begins the Delta was still partly marshy land, not long reclaimed from the sea, and the real Egyptians
of the valley despised the people who lived there as mere marsh-dwellers. Even after the Delta was formed,
the whole country was only about twice as large as Wales, and, though there was a great number of people in
it for its size, the population was only, at the most, about twice as great as that of London.
An old Greek historian once said, "Egypt is the gift of the Nile," and it is perfectly true. We have seen how the
great river made the country to begin with, cutting out the narrow valley through the hills, and building up the
flat plain of the Delta. But the Nile has not only made the country; it keeps it alive. You know that Egypt has
always been one of the most fertile lands in the world. Almost anything will grow there, and it produces
wonderful crops of corn and vegetables, and, nowadays, of cotton. It was the same in old days. When Rome
was the capital of the world, she used to get most of the corn to feed her hungry thousands from Egypt by the
famous Alexandrian corn-ships; and you remember how, in the Bible story, Joseph's brethren came down
from Palestine because, though there was famine there, there was "corn in Egypt." And yet Egypt is a land
where rain is almost unknown. Sometimes there will come a heavy thunder-shower; but for month after
month, year in and year out, there may be no rain at all.
How can a rainless country grow anything? The secret is the Nile. Every year, when the rains fall in the great
lake-basin of Central Africa, from which one branch of the great river comes, and on the Abyssinian hills,
where the other branch rises, the Nile comes down in flood. All the lower lands are covered, and a fresh
deposit of Nile mud is left upon them; and, though the river does not rise to the higher grounds, the water is
led into big canals, and these, again, are divided up into little ones, till it circulates through the whole land, as
the blood circulates through your arteries and veins. This keeps the land fertile, and makes up for the lack of
rain.
Apart from its wonderful river, the country itself has no very striking features. It is rather a monotonous
land--a long ribbon of green running through a great waste of yellow desert and barren hills. But the great
charm that draws people's minds to Egypt, and gives the old land a never-failing interest, is its great story of
the past, and all the relics of that story which are still to be seen.
In no other land can you see the real people and things of the days of long ago as you can see them in Egypt.
Think how we should prize an actual building that had been connected with the story of King Arthur, if such a
thing could be found in our country, and what wonderful romance would belong to the weapons, the actual
shields and helmets, swords and lances, of the Knights of the Round Table, Lancelot and Tristram and
Galahad--if only we could find them. Out there in Egypt you can see buildings compared with which King
Arthur's Camelot would be only a thing of yesterday; and you can look, not only on the weapons, but on the
actual faces and forms of great Kings and soldiers who lived, and fought bravely for their country, hundreds
of years before Saul and Jonathan and David began to fight the battles of Israel. You can see the pictures of
how people lived in those far-away days, how their houses were built, how they traded and toiled, how they
amused themselves, how they behaved in time of sorrow, how they worshipped God--all set down by
themselves at the very time when they were doing these things. You can even see the games at which the
children used to play, and the queer old-fashioned toys and dolls that they played with, and you can read the
stories which their mothers and their nurses used to tell them.
These are the things which make this old land of Egypt so interesting to us all to-day; and I want to try to tell
you about some of them, so that you may be able to have in your mind's eye a real picture of the life of those
long past days.
CHAPTER I 6
CHAPTER II
A DAY IN THEBES
If any foreigner were wanting to get an idea of our country, and to see how our people live, I suppose the first
place that he would go to would be London, because it is the capital of the whole country, and its greatest city;
and so, if we want to learn something about Egypt, and how people lived there in those far-off days, we must
try to get to the capital of the country, and see what is to be seen there.
Suppose, then, that we are no longer living in Britain in the twentieth century, but that somehow or other we
have got away back into the past, far beyond the days of Jesus Christ, beyond even the times of Moses, and
are living about 1,300 years before Christ. We have come from Tyre in a Phoenician galley, laden with costly
bales of cloth dyed with Tyrian purple, and beautiful vessels wrought in bronze and copper, to sell in the
markets of Thebes, the greatest city in Egypt. We have coasted along past Carmel and Joppa, and, after
narrowly escaping being driven in a storm on the dangerous quicksand called the Syrtis, we have entered one
of the mouths of the Nile. We have taken up an Egyptian pilot at the river mouth, and he stands on a little
platform at the bow of the galley, and shouts his directions to the steersmen, who work the two big rudders,
one on either side of the ship's stern. The north wind is blowing strongly and driving us swiftly upstream, in
spite of the current of the great river; so our weary oarsmen have shipped their oars, and we drive steadily
southwards under our one big swelling sail.
At first we sail along through a broad flat plain, partly cultivated, and partly covered with marsh and marsh
plants. By-and-by the green plain begins to grow narrower; we are coming to the end of the Delta, and
entering upon the real valley of Egypt. Soon we pass a great city, its temples standing out clear against the
deep blue sky, with their towering gateways, gay flags floating from tall flagstaves in front of them, and great
obelisks pointing to the sky; and our pilot says that this is Memphis, one of the oldest towns in the country,
and for long its capital. Not far from Memphis, three great pyramid-shaped masses of stone rise up on the
river-bank, looking almost like mountains; and the pilot tells us that these are the tombs of some of the great
Kings of long past days, and that all around them lie smaller pyramids and other tombs of Kings and great
men.
But we are bound for a city greater even than Memphis, and so we never stop, but hasten always southward.
Several days of steady sailing carry us past many towns that cluster near the river, past one ruined city, falling
into mere heaps of stone and brick, which our pilot tells us was once the capital of a wicked King who tried to
cast down all the old gods of Egypt, and to set up a new god of his own; and at last we see, far ahead of us, a
huge cluster of buildings on both sides of the river, which marks a city greater than we have ever seen.
As we sweep up the river we see that there are really two cities. On the east bank lies the city of the living,
with its strong walls and towers, its enormous temples, and an endless crowd of houses of all sorts and sizes,
from the gay palaces of the nobles to the mud huts of the poor people. On the west bank lies the city of the
dead. It has neither streets nor palaces, and no hum of busy life goes up from it; but it is almost more striking
than its neighbour across the river. The hills and cliffs are honeycombed with long rows of black openings, the
doorways of the tombs where the dead of Thebes for centuries back are sleeping. Out on the plain, between
the cliffs and the river, temple rises after temple in seemingly endless succession. Some of these temples are
small and partly ruined, but some are very great and splendid; and, as the sunlight strikes upon them, it sends
back flashes of gold and crimson and blue that dazzle the eyes.
[Illustration: Plate 2 THE GODDESS ISIS DANDLING THE KING. Page 18]
But now our galley is drawing in towards the quay on the east side of the river, and in a few minutes the great
sail comes thundering down, and, as the ship drifts slowly up to the quay, the mooring-ropes are thrown and
made fast, and our long voyage is at an end. The Egyptian Custom-house officers come on board to examine
CHAPTER II 7
the cargo, and collect the dues that have to be paid on it; and we watch them with interest, for they are quite
different in appearance from our own hook-nosed, bearded sailors, with their thick many-coloured cloaks.
These Egyptians are all clean shaven; some of them wear wigs, and some have their hair cut straight across
their brows, while it falls thickly behind upon their necks in a multitude of little curls, which must have taken
them no small trouble to get into order. Most wear nothing but a kilt of white linen; but the chief officer has a
fine white cloak thrown over his shoulders; his linen kilt is stiffly starched, so that it stands out almost like a
board where it folds over in front, and he wears a gilded girdle with fringed ends which hang down nearly to
his knees. In his right hand he carries a long stick, which he is not slow to lay over the shoulders of his men
when they do not obey his orders fast enough.
After a good deal of hot argument, the amount of the tax is settled and paid, and we are free to go up into the
great town. We have not gone far before we find that life in Thebes can be quite exciting. A great noise is
heard from one of the narrow riverside streets, and a crowd of men comes rushing up with shouts and oaths.
Ahead of them runs a single figure, whose writing-case, stuck in his girdle, marks him out as a scribe. He is
almost at his last gasp, for he is stout and not accustomed to running; and he is evidently fleeing for his life,
for the men behind him--rough, half-naked, ill-fed creatures of the working class--are chasing him with cries
of anger, and a good deal of stone-throwing. Bruised and bleeding, he darts up to the gate of a handsome
house whose garden-wall faces the street. He gasps out a word to the porter, and is quickly passed into the
garden. The gate is slammed and bolted in the faces of his pursuers, who form a ring round it, shouting and
shaking their fists.
In a little while the gate is cautiously unbarred, and a fine-looking man, very richly dressed, and followed by
half a dozen well-armed negro guards, steps forward, and asks the workmen why they are here, making such a
noise, and why they have chased and beaten his secretary. He is Prince Paser, who has charge of the Works
Department of the Theban Government, and the workmen are masons employed on a large job in the cemetery
of Thebes. They all shout at once in answer to the Prince's question; but by-and-by they push forward a
spokesman, and he begins, rather sheepishly at first, but warming up as he goes along, to make their complaint
to the great man.
He and his mates, he says, have been working for weeks. They have had no wages; they have not even had the
corn and oil which ought to be issued as rations to Government workmen. So they have struck work, and now
they have come to their lord the Prince to entreat him either to give command that the rations be issued, or, if
his stores are exhausted, to appeal to Pharaoh. "We have been driven here by hunger and thirst; we have no
clothes, we have no oil, we have no food. Write to our lord the Pharaoh, that he may give us something for our
sustenance." When the spokesman has finished his complaint, the whole crowd volubly assents to what he has
said, and sways to and fro in a very threatening manner.
Prince Paser, however, is an old hand at dealing with such complaints. With a smiling face he promises that
fifty sacks of corn shall be sent to the cemetery immediately, with oil to correspond. Only the workmen must
go back to their work at once, and there must be no more chasing of poor Secretary Amen-nachtu. Otherwise,
he can do nothing. The workmen grumble a little. They have been put off with promises before, and have got
little good of them. But they have no leader bold enough to start a riot, and they have no weapons, and the
spears and bows of the Prince's Nubians look dangerous. Finally they turn, and disappear, grumbling, down
the street from which they came; and Prince Paser, with a shrug of his shoulders, goes indoors again. Whether
the fifty sacks of corn are ever sent or not, is another matter. Strikes, you see, were not unknown, even so long
ago as this.
CHAPTER II 8
CHAPTER III
A DAY IN THEBES--Continued
Having seen the settlement of the masons' strike, we wander up into the heart of the town. The streets are
generally narrow and winding, and here and there the houses actually meet overhead, so that we pass out of
the blinding sunlight into a sort of dark tunnel. Some of the houses are large and high; but even the largest
make no display towards the street. They will be fine enough inside, with bright courts surrounded with trees,
in the midst of which lies a cool pond of water, and with fine rooms decorated with gay hangings; but their
outer walls are almost absolutely blank, with nothing but a heavy door breaking the dead line. We pass by
some quarters where there is nothing but a crowd of mud huts, packed so closely together that there is only
room for a single foot-passenger to thread his way through the narrow alleys between them. These are the
workmen's quarters, and the heat and smell in them are so overpowering that one wonders how people can
live in such places.
By-and-by we come out into a more open space--one of the bazaars of the city--where business is in full
swing. The shops are little shallow booths quite open to the front; and all the goods are spread out round the
shopkeeper, who squats cross-legged in the middle of his property, ready to serve his customers, and invites
the attention of the passers-by by loud explanations of the goodness and cheapness of his wares. All sorts of
people are coming and going, for a Theban crowd holds representatives of nearly every nation known. Here
are the townsfolk, men and women, out to buy supplies for their houses, or to exchange the news of the day;
peasants from the villages round about, bringing in vegetables and cattle to barter for the goods which can
only be got in the town; fine ladies and gentlemen, dressed elaborately in the latest Court fashion, with
carefully curled wigs, long pleated robes of fine transparent linen, and dainty, brightly-coloured sandals
turned up at the toes. At one moment you rub shoulders with a Hittite from Kadesh, a conspicuous figure,
with his high-peaked cap, pale complexion, and heavy, pointed boots. He looks round him curiously, as if
thinking that Thebes would be a splendid town to plunder. Then a priest of high rank goes by, with shaven
head, a panther skin slung across his shoulder over his white robe, and a roll of papyrus in his hand. A
Sardinian of the bodyguard swaggers along behind him, the ball and horns on his helmet flashing in the
sunlight, his big sword swinging in its sheath as he walks; and a Libyan bowman, with two bright feathers in
his leather skull-cap, looks disdainfully at him as he shoulders his way through the crowd.
All around us people are buying and selling. Money, as we know it, has not yet been invented, and nearly all
the trade is done by means of exchange. When it comes to be a question of how many fish have to be given
for a bed, or whether a load of onions is good value for a chair, you can imagine that there has to be a good
deal of argument. Besides, the Egyptian dearly loves bargaining for the mere excitement of the thing, and so
the clatter of tongues is deafening. Here and there one or two traders have advanced a little beyond the
old-fashioned way of barter, and offer, instead of goods, so many rings of copper, silver, or gold wire. A
peasant who has brought in a bullock to sell is offered 90 copper "uten" (as the rings are called) for it; but he
loudly protests that this is robbery, and after a long argument he screws the merchant up to 111 "uten," with 8
more as a luck-penny, and the bargain is clinched. Even then the rings have still to be weighed that he may be
sure he is not being cheated. So a big pair of balances is brought out; the "uten" are heaped into one scale, and
in the other are piled weights in the shape of bulls' heads. Finally, he is satisfied, and picks up his bag of rings;
but the wily merchant is not done with him yet. He spreads out various tempting bargains before the eyes of
the countryman, and, before the latter leaves the shop, most of the copper rings have found their way back
again to the merchant's sack.
A little farther on, the Tyrian traders, to whom the cargo of our galley is consigned, have their shop. Screens,
made of woven grass, shelter it from the sun, and under their shade all sorts of gorgeous stuffs are displayed,
glowing with the deep rich colours, of which the Tyrians alone have the secret since the sack of Knossos
destroyed the trade of Crete. Beyond the Tyrian booth, a goldsmith is busily employed in his shop. Necklets
and bracelets of gold and silver, beautifully inlaid with all kinds of rich colours, hang round him; and he is
CHAPTER III 9
hard at work, with his little furnace and blowpipe, putting the last touches to the welding of a bracelet, for
which a lady is patiently waiting.
In one corner of the bazaar stands a house which makes no display of wares, but, nevertheless, seems to
secure a constant stream of customers. Workmen slink in at the door, as though half ashamed of themselves,
and reappear, after a little, wiping their mouths, and not quite steady in their gait. A young man, with pale and
haggard face, swaggers past and goes in, and, as he enters the door, one bystander nudges another and
remarks: "Pentuere is going to have a good day again; he will come to a bad end, that young man."
By-and-by the door opens again, and Pentuere comes out staggering. He looks vacantly round, and tries to
walk away; but his legs refuse to carry him, and, after a stumble or two, he falls in a heap and lies in the road,
a pitiful sight. The passers-by jeer and laugh at him as he lies helpless; but one decent-looking man points him
out to his young son, and says: "See this fellow, my son, and learn not to drink beer to excess. Thou dost fall
and break thy limbs, and bespatter thyself with mud, like a crocodile, and no one reaches out a hand to thee.
Thy comrades go on drinking, and say, 'Away with this fellow, who is drunk.' If anyone should seek thee on
business, thou art found lying in the dust like a little child."
But in spite of much wise advice, the Egyptian, though generally temperate, is only too fond of making "a
good day," as he calls it, at the beerhouse. Even fine ladies sometimes drink too much at their great parties,
and have to be carried away very sick and miserable. Worst of all, the very judges of the High Court have
been known to take a day off during the hearing of a long case, in order to have a revel with the criminals
whom they were trying; and it is not so long since two of them had their noses cut off, as a warning to the rest
against such shameful conduct.
Sauntering onwards, we gradually get near to the sacred quarter of the town, and can see the towering
gateways and obelisks of the great temples over the roofs of the houses. Soon a great crowd comes towards
us, and the sounds of trumpets and flutes are heard coming from the midst of it. Inquiring what is the meaning
of the bustle, we are told that one of the images of Amen, the great god of Thebes, is being carried in
procession as a preliminary to an important service which is to take place in the afternoon, and at which the
King is going to preside. Stepping back under the doorway of a house, we watch the procession go past. After
a group of musicians and singers, and a number of women who are dancing as they go, and shaking curious
metal rattles, there comes a group of six men, who form the centre of the whole crowd, and on whom the eyes
of all are fixed.
They are tall, spare, keen-looking men, their heads clean shaven, their bodies wrapped in pure white robes of
the beautiful Egyptian linen. On their shoulders they carry, by means of two long poles, a model of a Nile
boat, in the midst of which rises a little shrine. The shrine is carefully draped round with a veil, so as to hide
the god from curious eyes. But just in front of the doorway where we are standing a small stone pillar rises
from the roadway, and when the bearers come to this point, the bark of the god is rested on the top of the
pillar. Two censer-bearers come forward, and swing their censers, wafting clouds of incense round the shrine;
a priest lifts up his voice, loudly intoning a hymn of praise to the great god who creates and sustains all things;
and a few of the by-standers lay before the bark offerings of flowers, fruit, and eatables of various kinds. Then
comes the solemn moment. Amid breathless silence, the veil of the shrine is slowly drawn aside, and the
faithful can see a little wooden image, about 18 inches high, adorned with tall plumes, carefully dressed, and
painted with green and black. The revelation of this little doll, to a Theban crowd the most sacred object in all
the world, is hailed with shouts of wonder and reverence. Then the veil is drawn again, the procession passes
on, and the streets are left quiet for awhile.
[Illustration: Plate 3 THE GREAT GATE OF THE TEMPLE OF LUXOR, WITH OBELISK. Pages 74, 75]
We are reminded that, if we wish to get a meal before starting out to see Pharaoh passing in procession to the
temple, we had better lose no time, and so we turn our faces riverwards again, and wander down through the
CHAPTER III 10
endless maze of streets to where our galley is moored at the quay.
CHAPTER III 11
CHAPTER IV
PHARAOH AT HOME
The time is coming on now for the King to go in state to the great temple at Karnak to offer sacrifice, and as
we go up to the palace to see him come forth in all his glory, let me tell you a little about him and the kind of
life he leads. Pharaoh, of course, is not his real name; it is not even his official title; it is just a word which is
used to describe a person who is so great that people scarcely venture to call him by his proper name. Just as
the Turks nowadays speak of the "Sublime Porte," when they mean the Sultan and his Government, so the
Egyptians speak of "Per-o," or Pharaoh, as we call it, which really signifies "Great House," when they mean
the King.
For the King of Egypt is a very great man indeed; in fact, his people look upon him, and he looks upon
himself, as something more than a man. There are many gods in Egypt; but the god whom the people know
best, and to whom they pay the most reverence, is their King. Ever since there have been Kings in the country,
and that is a very long time now, the reigning monarch has been looked upon as a kind of god manifest in the
flesh. He calls himself "Son of the Sun"; in the temples you will see pictures of his childhood, where great
goddesses dandle the young god upon their knees (Plate 2). Divine honours are paid, and sacrifices offered to
him; and when he dies, and goes to join his brother-gods in heaven, a great temple rises to his memory, and
hosts of priests are employed in his worship. There is just one distinction made between him and the other
gods. Amen at Thebes, Ptah at Memphis, and all the rest of the crowd of divinities, are called "the great gods."
Pharaoh takes a different title. He is called "the good god."
At present "the good god" is Ramses II. Of course, that is only one part of his name; for, like all the other
Pharaohs, he has a list of titles that would fill a page. His subjects in Thebes have not seen very much of him
for a long time, for there has been so much to do away in Syria, that he has built another capital at Tanis,
which the Hebrews call Zoan, down between the Delta and the eastern frontier, and spends most of his time
there. People who have been down the river tell us great wonders about the beauty of the new town, its great
temple, and the huge statue of the King, 90 feet high, which stands before the temple gate. But Thebes is still
the centre of the nation's life, and now, when it is growing almost certain that there will be another war with
those vile Hittites in the North of Syria, he has come up to the great city to take counsel with his brother-god,
Amen, and to make arrangements for gathering his army. The royal palace is in a constant bustle, with envoys
coming and going, and counsellors and generals continually passing in and out with reports and orders.
Outside, the palace is not so very imposing. The Egyptians built their temples to last for ever; but the palaces
of their Kings were meant to serve only for a short time. The new King might not care for the old King's
home, and so each Pharaoh builds his house according to his own taste, of light materials. It will serve his
turn, and his successor may build another for himself. A high wall, with battlements, towers, and heavy gates,
surrounds it; for, though Pharaoh is a god, his subjects are sometimes rather difficult to keep in order. Plots
against the King have not been unknown in the past; and on at least one occasion, a great Pharaoh of bygone
days had to spring from his couch and fight single-handed for his life against a crowd of conspirators who had
forced an entrance into the palace while he was enjoying his siesta. So since then Pharaoh has found it better
to trust in his strong walls, and in the big broadswords of his faithful Sardinian guardsmen, than in any
divinity that may belong to himself.
Within the great boundary wall lie pleasant gardens, gay with all sorts of flowers, and an artificial lake shows
its gleaming water here and there through the trees and shrubs. The palace itself is all glittering white stucco
on the outside. A high central door leads into a great audience hall, glowing with colour, its roof supported by
painted pillars in the form of lotus-stalks; and on either side of this lie two smaller halls. Behind the audience
chamber are two immense dining-rooms, and behind these come the sleeping apartments of the numerous
household. Ramses has a multitude of wives, and a whole army of sons and daughters, and it takes no small
space to house them all. The bedroom of the great King himself stands apart from the other rooms, and is
CHAPTER IV 12
surrounded by banks of flowers in full bloom.
The Son of the Sun has had a busy day already. He has had many letters and despatches to read and consider.
Some of the Syrian vassal-princes have sent clay tablets, covered with their curious arrow-headed writing,
giving news of the advance of the Hittites, and imploring the help of the Egyptian army; and now the King is
about to give audience, and to consider these with his great nobles and Generals. At one end of the reception
hall stands a low balcony, supported on gaily-painted wooden pillars which end in capitals of lotus-flowers.
The front of this balcony is overlaid with gold, and richly decorated with turquoise and lapis lazuli. Here the
King will show himself to his subjects, accompanied by his favourite wife, Queen Nefertari, and some of the
young Princes and Princesses. The folding doors of the audience chamber are thrown open, and the barons,
the provincial governors, and the high officers of the army and the State throng in to do homage to their
master.
[Illustration]
In a few moments the glittering crowd is duly arranged, a door opens at the back of the balcony, and the King
of the Two Lands, Lord of the Vulture and the Snake, steps forth with his Queen and family. In earlier times,
whenever the King appeared, the assembled nobles were expected to fall on their faces and kiss the ground
before him. Fashion has changed, however, and now the great folks, at all events, are no longer required to
"smell the earth." As Pharaoh enters the balcony, the nobles bow profoundly, and raise their arms as if in
prayer to "the good god." Then, in silent reverence, they wait until it shall please their lord to speak.
Ramses sweeps his glance over the crowd, singles out the General in command of the Theban troops, and puts
a question to him as to the readiness of his division--the picked division of the army. The soldier steps
forward with a deep bow; but it is not Court manners for him to answer his lord's question directly. Instead, he
begins by reciting a little psalm of praise, which tells of the King's greatness, his valour and skill in war, and
asserts that wherever his horses tread his enemies flee before him and perish. This little piece of flattery over,
the General begins, "O King, my master," and in a few sensible words gives the information required. So the
audience goes on, counsellor after counsellor coming forward at the royal command, reciting his little hymn,
and then giving his opinion on such matters as his master suggests to him. At last the council is over, the King
gives orders to his equerry to prepare his chariot for the procession to the temple, and, as he turns to leave the
audience chamber, the assembled nobles once more bow profoundly, and raise their arms in adoration.
After a short delay, the great gates of the boundary wall of the palace are opened; a company of spearmen, in
quilted leather kilts and leather skull-caps, marches out, and takes position a short distance from the gateway.
Behind them comes a company of the Sardinians of the guard, heavily armed, with bright helmets, broad
round shields, quilted corselets, and long, heavy, two-edged swords. They range themselves on either side of
the roadway, and stand like statues, waiting for the appearance of Pharaoh. There is a whir of chariot-wheels,
and the royal chariot sweeps through the gateway, and sets off at a good round pace towards the temple. The
spearmen in front start at the double, and the guardsmen, in spite of their heavy equipment, keep pace with
their royal master on either side.
The waiting crowd bows to the dust as the sovereign passes; but Pharaoh looks neither to the right hand nor to
the left. He stands erect and impassive in the swaying chariot, holding the crook and whip which are the
Egyptian royal emblems. On his head he wears the royal war helmet, in the front of which a golden cobra
rears its crest from its coils, as if to threaten the enemies of Egypt. His finely-shaped, swarthy features are
adorned, or disfigured, by an artificial beard, which is fastened on by a strap passing up in front of the ears.
His tall slender body is covered, above his corselet, with a robe of fine white linen, a perfect wonder of
pleating; and round his waist passes a girdle of gold and green enamel, whose ends cross and hang down
almost to his knees, terminating in two threatening cobra heads (Plate 4 and Cover Picture). On either side of
him run the fan-bearers, who manage, by a miracle of skill and activity, to keep their great gaily-coloured fans
of perfumed ostrich feathers waving round the royal head even as they run.
CHAPTER IV 13
Behind the King comes a long train of other chariots, only less splendid than that of Ramses. In the first
stands Queen Nefertari, languidly sniffing at a lotus-flower as she passes on. The others are filled by some of
the Princes of the blood, who are going to take part in the ceremony at the temple, chief among them the
wizard Prince Khaemuas, the greatest magician in Egypt, who has spells that can bring the dead from their
graves. Some in the crowd shrink from his keen eye, and mutter that the papyrus roll which he holds so close
to his breast was taken from the grave of another magician Prince of ancient days, and that Khaemuas will
know no peace till it is restored. In a few minutes the whole brilliant train has passed, dazzling the eyes with a
blaze of gold and white and scarlet; and crowds of courtiers stream after their master, as fast as their feet can
carry them, towards Karnak. You have seen, if only for a moment, the greatest man on earth--the Great
Oppressor of Hebrew story. Very mighty and very proud he is; and he does not dream that the little Hebrew
boy whom his daughter has adopted, and who is being trained in the priestly college at Heliopolis, will one
day humble all the pride of Egypt, and that the very name of Ramses shall be best remembered because it is
linked with that of Moses.
CHAPTER IV 14
CHAPTER V
THE LIFE OF A SOLDIER
When you read about the Egyptians in the Bible, it seems as though they were nearly always fighting; and,
indeed, they did a good deal of fighting in their time, as nearly every nation did in those old days. But in
reality they were not a great soldier people, like their rivals the Assyrians, or the Babylonians. We, who have
had so much to do with their descendants, the modern Egyptians, and have fought both against them and with
them, know that the "Gippy" is not fond of soldiering in his heart. He makes a very good, patient,
hardworking soldier when he has good officers; but he is not like the Soudanese, who love fighting for
fighting's sake. He much prefers to live quietly in his own native village, and cultivate his own bit of ground.
And his forefathers, in these long-past days, were very much of the same mind. Often, of course, they had to
fight, when Pharaoh ordered them out for a campaign in the Soudan or in Syria, and then they fought
wonderfully well; but all the time their hearts were at home, and they were glad to get back to their farm-work
and their simple pleasures. They were a peaceful, kindly, pleasant race, with little of the cruelty and fierceness
that you find continually among the Assyrians.
[Illustration: PLATE 4. RAMSES II. IN HIS WAR CHARIOT: SARDINIAN GUARDSMEN ON FOOT.]
In fact, the old Egyptian rather despised soldiering as a profession. He thought it was rather a miserable,
muddled kind of a job, in which, unless you were a great officer, you got all the hard knocks and none of the
honours; and I am not sure that he was far wrong. His great idea of a happy life was to get employment as a
scribe, or, as we should say, a clerk, to some big man or to the Government, to keep accounts and write
reports. Of course the people could not all be scribes; but an Egyptian who had sons was never so proud as
when he could get one of them into a scribe's position, even though the young man might look down upon his
old father and his brothers, toiling on the land or serving in the army.
A curious old book has come down to us from these ancient days, in which the writer, who had been both a
soldier and a high officer under Government in what we should call the diplomatic service, has told a young
friend his opinion of soldiering as a profession. The young man had evidently been dazzled with the idea of
being in the cavalry, or, rather, the chariotry, for the Egyptian soldiers did not ride on horses like our cavalry,
but drove them in chariots, in each of which there were two men--the charioteer, to drive the two horses, and
the soldier, who stood beside the driver and fought with the bow, and sometimes with the lance or sword.
But this wise old friend tells him that even to be in the chariotry is not by any means a pleasant job. Of course
it seems very nice at first. The young man gets his new equipment, and thinks all the world of himself as he
goes home to show off his fine feathers.
"He receives beautiful horses, And rejoices and exults, And returns with them to his town."
But then comes the inspection, and if he has not everything in perfect order he has a bad time of it, for he is
thrown down on the ground, and beaten with sticks till he is sore all over.
But if the lot of the cavalry soldier is hard, that of the infantry-man is harder. In the barracks he is flogged for
every mistake or offence. Then war breaks out, and he has to march with his battalion to Syria. Day after day
he has to tramp on foot through the wild hill-country, so different from the flat, fertile homeland that he loves.
He has to carry all his heavy equipment and his rations, so that he is laden like a donkey; and often he has to
drink dirty water, which makes him ill. Then, when the battle comes, he gets all the danger and the wounds,
while the Generals get all the credit. When the war is over, he comes home riding on a donkey, a
broken-down man, sick and wounded, his very clothes stolen by the rascals who should have attended on him.
Far better, the wise man says, to be a scribe, and to remain comfortably at home. I dare say it was all quite
true, just as perhaps it would not be very far from the truth at the present time; but, in spite of it all, Pharaoh
CHAPTER V 15
had his battles to fight, and he got his soldiers all right when they were needed.
The Egyptian army was not generally a very big one. It was nothing like the great hosts that we hear of
nowadays, or read of in some of the old histories. The armies that the Pharaohs led into Syria were not often
much bigger than what we should call an army corps nowadays--probably about 20,000 men altogether, rarely
more than 25,000. But in that number you could find almost as many different sorts of men as in our own
Indian army. There would be first the native Egyptian spearmen and bowmen--the spearmen with leather caps
and quilted leather tunics, carrying a shield and spear, and sometimes an axe, or a dagger, or short sword--the
bowmen, more lightly equipped, but probably more dangerous enemies, for the Egyptian archers were almost
as famous as the old English bowmen, and won many a battle for their King. Then came the chariot brigade,
also of native Egyptians, men probably of higher rank than the foot-soldiers. The chariots were very light, and
it must have been exceedingly difficult for the bowman to balance himself in the narrow car, as it bumped and
clattered over rough ground. The two horses were gaily decorated, and often wore plumes on their heads. The
charioteer sometimes twisted the reins round his waist, and could take a hand in the fighting if his companion
was hard pressed, guiding his horses by swaying his body to one side or the other.
Round the Pharaoh himself, as he stood in his beautiful chariot, marched the royal bodyguard. It was made up
of men whom the Egyptians called "Sherden"--Sardinians, probably, who had come over the sea to serve for
hire in the army of the great King. They wore metal helmets, with a round ball on the top and horns at the
sides, carried round bossed shields, and were armed with great heavy swords of much the same shape as those
which the Norman knights used to carry. Behind the native troops and the bodyguard marched the other
mercenaries--regiments of black Soudanese, with wild-beast skins thrown over their ebony shoulders; and
light-coloured Libyans from the West, each with a couple of feathers stuck in his leather skull-cap.
Scouts went on ahead to scour the country, and bring to the King reports of the enemy's whereabouts. Beside
the royal chariot there padded along a strange, but very useful soldier--a great tame lion, which had been
trained to guard his master and fight with teeth and claws against his enemies. Last of all came the transport
train, with the baggage carried on the backs of a long line of donkeys, and protected by a baggage-guard. The
Egyptians were good marchers, and even in the hot Syrian sunshine, and across a rough country where roads
were almost unknown, they could keep up a steady fifteen miles a day for a week on end without being fagged
out.
Let us follow the fortunes of an Egyptian soldier through one of the great battles of the nation's history.
Menna was one of the most skilful charioteers of the whole Egyptian army--so skilful that, though he was still
quite young, he was promoted to be driver of the royal war-chariot when King Ramses II. marched out from
Zaru, the frontier garrison town of Egypt, to fight with the Hittites in Northern Syria. During all the long
march across the desert, through Palestine, and over the northern mountain passes, no enemy was seen at all,
and, though Menna was kept busy enough attending to his horses and seeing that the chariot was in perfect
order, he was in no danger. But as the army began to wind down the long valley of the Orontes towards the
town of Kadesh, the scouts were kept out in every direction, and the whole host was anxiously on the lookout
for the Hittite troops.
Kadesh came in sight at last. Far on the horizon its towers could be seen, and the sun's rays sparkled on the
river and on the broad moat which surrounded the walls; but still no enemy was to be seen. The scouts came
in with the report that the Hittites had retreated northwards in terror, and King Ramses imagined that Kadesh
was going to fall into his hands without a battle. His army was divided into four brigades, and he himself
hurried on rather rashly with the first brigade, leaving the other three to straggle on behind him, widely
separated from one another (Plate 4).
The first brigade reached its camping-ground to the north-west of Kadesh; the tired troops pitched camp; the
baggage was unloaded; and the donkeys, released from their burdens, rolled on the ground in delight. Just at
that moment some of the Egyptian scouts came in, bringing with them two Arabs whom they had caught, and
CHAPTER V 16
suspected to belong to the enemy. King Ramses ordered the Arabs to be soundly beaten with sticks, and the
poor creatures confessed that the Hittite King, with a great army, was concealed on the other side of Kadesh,
watching for an opportunity to attack the Egyptian army. In great haste Ramses, scolding his scouts the while
for not keeping a better lookout, began to get his soldiers under arms again, while Menna ran and yoked to the
royal chariot the two noble horses which had been kept fresh for the day of battle.
But before Pharaoh could leap into his chariot a wild uproar broke out at the gate of the camp, and the
scattered fragments of the second brigade came pouring in headlong flight into the enclosure. Behind them the
whole Hittite chariot force, 2,500 chariots strong, each chariot with three men in it, came clattering and
leaping upon the heels of the fugitives. The Hittite King had waited till he saw the first brigade busy pitching
camp, and then, as the second came straggling up, he had launched his chariots upon the flank of the weary
soldiers, who were swept away in a moment as if by a flood.
The rush of terrified men carried off the first brigade along with it in hopeless rout. Ramses and Menna were
left with only a few picked chariots of the household troops, and the whole Hittite army was coming on. But
though King Ramses had made a terrible bungle of his generalship, he was at least a brave man. Leaping into
his chariot, and calling to the handful of faithful soldiers to follow him, he bade Menna lash his horses and
charge the advancing Hittites. Menna was no coward, but when he saw the thin line of Egyptian troops, and
looked at the dense mass of Hittite chariots, his heart almost failed him. He never thought of disobedience,
but, as he stooped over his plunging horses, he panted to the King: "O mighty strength of Egypt in the day of
battle, we are alone in the midst of the enemy. O, save us, Ramses, my good lord!" "Steady, steady, my
charioteer," said Ramses, "I am going among them like a hawk!"
In a moment the fiery horses were whirling the King and his charioteer between the files of the Hittite
chariots, which drew aside as if terrified at the glittering figures that dashed upon them so fearlessly. As they
swept through, Menna had enough to do to manage his steeds, which were wild with excitement; but Ramses'
bow was bent again and again, and at every twang of the bowstring a Hittite champion fell from his chariot.
Behind the King came his household troops, and all together they burst through the chariot brigade of the
enemy, leaving a long trail marked by dead and wounded men, overturned chariots, and maddened horses.
Still King Ramses had only gained a breathing-space. The Hittites far outnumbered his little force, and,
though his orderlies were madly galloping to bring up the third and fourth brigades, it must be some time yet
before even the nearest could come into action. Besides, on the other bank of the river there hung a great
cloud of 8,000 Hittite spearmen, under the command of the Hittite King himself. If these got time to cross the
river, the Egyptian position, bad enough as it was, would be hopeless. There was nothing for it but to charge
again and again, and, if possible, drive back the Hittite chariots on the river, so as to hinder the spearmen from
crossing.
So Menna whipped up his horses again, and, with arrow on string, the Pharaoh dashed upon his enemies once
more. Again they burst through the opposing ranks, scattering death on either side as they passed. Now some
of the fragments of the first and second brigades were beginning to rally and come back to the field, and the
struggle was becoming less unequal. The Egyptian quivers were nearly all empty now; but lance and sword
still remained, and inch by inch the Hittites were forced back upon the river. Their King stood ingloriously on
the opposite bank, unable to do anything. It was too late for him to try to move his spearmen across--they
would only have been trampled down by the retreating chariots. At last a great shout from the rear announced
the arrival of the third Egyptian brigade, and, the little knot of brave men who had saved the day still leading,
the army swept the broken Hittites down the bank of the Orontes into the river.
Great was the confusion and the slaughter. As the chariots struggled through the ford, the Egyptian bowmen,
spread out along the bank, picked off the chiefs. The two brothers of the Hittite King, the chief of his
bodyguard, his shield-bearer, and his chief scribe, were all killed. The King of Aleppo missed the ford, and
was swept down the river; but some of his soldiers dashed into the water, rescued him, and, in rough first aid,
CHAPTER V 17
held the half-drowned leader up by the heels, to let the water drain out of him. The Hittite King picked up his
broken fugitives, covered them with his mass of spearmen, and moved reluctantly off the field where so
splendid a chance of victory had been missed, and turned into defeat. The Egyptians were too few and too
weary to attempt to cross the river in pursuit, and they retired to the camp of the first brigade.
Then Pharaoh called his Captains before him. The troops stood around, leaning on their spears, ashamed of
their conduct in the earlier part of the day, and wondering at the grim signs of conflict that lay on every side.
King Ramses called Menna to him, and, handing the reins to a groom, the young charioteer came bowing
before his master. Pharaoh stripped from his own royal neck a collar of gold, and fastened it round the neck of
his faithful squire; and, while the Generals and Captains hung their heads for shame, the King told them how
shamefully they had left him to fight his battle alone, and how none had stood by him but the young
charioteer. "As for my two horses," he said, "they shall be fed before me every day in the royal palace."
[Illustration: PLATE 5. ZAZAMANKH AND THE LOST CORONET.]
Both armies had suffered too much loss for any further strife to be possible, and a truce was agreed upon. The
Hittites drew off to the north, and the Egyptians marched back again to Egypt, well aware that they had gained
little or nothing by all their efforts, but thankful that they had been saved from the total destruction which had
seemed so near.
A proud man was Menna when he drove the royal chariot up to the bridge of Zaru. As the troops passed the
frontier canal the road was lined on either side with crowds of nobles, priests, and scribes, strewing flowers in
the way, and bowing before the King. And after the Pharaoh himself, whose bravery had saved the day, there
was no one so honoured as the young squire who had stood so manfully by his master in the hour of danger.
CHAPTER V 18
CHAPTER VI
CHILD-LIFE IN ANCIENT EGYPT
How did the boys and girls live in this quaint old land so many hundreds of years ago? How were they
dressed, what sort of games did they play at, what sort of lessons did they learn, and what kind of school did
they go to? If you could have lived in Egypt in those far-off days, you would have found many differences
between your life of to-day and the life that the Egyptian children led; but you would also have found that
there were very many things much the same then as they are now. Boys and girls were boys and girls three
thousand years ago, just as they are now; and you would find that they did very much the same things, and
even played very much the same games as you do to-day.
When you read in your fairy-stories about a little boy or girl, you often hear that they had fairy godmothers
who came to their cradles, and gave them gifts, and foretold what was going to happen to the little babies in
after years. Well, when little Tahuti or little Sen-senb was born in Thebes fifteen hundred years before Christ,
there were fairy godmothers too, who presided over the great event; and there were others called the Hathors,
who foretold all that was going to happen to the little boy or girl as the years went on. The baby was kept a
baby much longer in those days than our little ones are kept. The happy mother nursed the little thing carefully
for three years at all events, carrying it about with her wherever she went, either on her shoulder, or astride
upon her hip.
If baby took ill, and the doctor was called in, the medicines that were given were not in the least like the
sugar-coated pills and capsules that make medicine-taking easy nowadays. The Egyptian doctor did not know
a very great deal about medicine and sickness, but he made up for his ignorance by the nastiness of the doses
which he gave to his patients. I don't think you would like to take pills made up of the moisture scraped from
pig's ears, lizard's blood, bad meat, and decaying fat, to say nothing of still nastier things. Often the doctor
would look very grave, and say, "The child is not ill; he is bewitched"; and then he would sit down and write
out a prescription something like this: "Remedy to drive away bewitchment. Take a great beetle; cut off his
head and his wings, boil him, put him in oil, and lay him out. Then cook his head and his wings; put them in
snake-fat, boil, and let the patient drink the mixture." I think you would almost rather take the risk of being
bewitched than drink a dose like that!
[Illustration: Plate 6 GRANITE STATUE OF RAMSES II. Page 75 Note the hieroglyphics on base of statue.
Pages 68, 69]
Sometimes the doctor gave no medicines at all, but wrote a few magic words on a scrap of old paper, and tied
it round the part where the pain was. I daresay it did as much good as his pills. Very often the mother believed
that it was not really sickness that was troubling her child, but that a ghost was coming and hurting him; so
when his cries showed that the ghost was in the room, the mother would rise up, shaking all over, I daresay,
and would repeat the verse that she had been taught would drive ghosts away:
"Comest thou to kiss this child? I suffer thee not to kiss him; Comest thou to quiet him? I suffer thee not to
quiet him; Comest thou to harm him? I suffer thee not to harm him; Comest thou to take him away? I suffer
thee not to take him away."
When little Tahuti has got over his baby aches, and escaped the ghosts, he begins to run about and play. He
and his sister are not bothered to any great extent with dressing in the mornings. They are very particular
about washing, but as Egypt is so hot, clothes are not needed very much, and so the little boy and girl play
about with nothing at all on their little brown bodies except, perhaps, a narrow girdle, or even a single thread
tied round the waist. They have their toys just like you. Tahuti has got a wonderful man, who, when you pull a
string, works a roller up and down upon a board, just like a baker rolling out dough, and besides he has a
crocodile that moves its jaws. His sister has dolls: a fine Egyptian lady and a frizzy-haired, black-faced
CHAPTER VI 19
Nubian girl. Sometimes they play together at ninepins, rolling the ball through a little gate.
For about four years this would go on, as long as Tahuti was what the Egyptians called "a wise little one."
Then, when he was four years old, the time came when he had to become "a writer in the house of books,"
which is what the Egyptians called a school-boy; so little Tahuti set off for school, still wearing no more
clothes than the thread tied round his waist, and with his black hair plaited up into a long thick lock, which
hung down over his right ear. The first thing that he had to learn was how to read and write, and this was no
easy task, for Egyptian writing, though it is very beautiful when well done, is rather difficult to master, all the
more as there were two different styles which had to be learned if a boy was going to become a man of
learning. I don't suppose that you think your old copy-books of much importance when you are done with
them; but the curious thing is that among all the books that have come down to us from ancient Egypt, there
are far more old copy-books than any others, and these books, with the teachers' corrections written on the
margins, and rough sketches scratched in here and there among the writing, have proved most valuable in
telling us what the Egyptians learned, and what they liked to read; for a great deal of the writing consisted in
the copying out of wise words of the men of former days, and sometimes of stories of old times.
These old copy-books can speak to us in one way, but if they could speak in another, I daresay they would tell
us of many weary hours in school, and of many floggings and tears; for the Egyptian school-master believed
with all his heart in the cane, and used it with great vigour and as often as he could. Little Tahuti used to look
forward to his daily flogging, much as he did to his lunch in the middle of the day, when his careful mother
regularly brought him three rolls of bread and two jugs of beer. "A boy's ears," his master used to say, "are on
his back, and he hears when he is beaten." One of the former pupils at his school writing to his teacher, and
recalling his school-days, says: "I was with thee since I was brought up as a child; thou didst beat my back,
and thine instructions went into my ear." Sometimes the boys, if they were stubborn, got punishments even
worse than the cane. Another boy, in a letter to his old master, says: "Thou hast made me buckle to since the
time that I was one of thy pupils. I spent my time in the lock-up, and was sentenced to three months, and
bound in the temple." I am afraid our schoolboys would think the old Egyptian teachers rather more severe
than the masters with whom they have to do nowadays.
Lesson-time occupied about half the day, and when it came to an end the boys all ran out of the school,
shouting for joy. That custom has not changed much, anyway, in all these hundreds of years. I don't think they
had any home lessons to do, and so, perhaps, their school-time was not quite so bad as we might imagine from
the rough punishments they used to get.
When Tahuti grew a little older, and had fairly mastered the rudiments of writing, his teacher set him to write
out copies of different passages from the best known Egyptian books, partly to keep up his hand-writing, and
partly to teach him to know good Egyptian and to use correct language. Sometimes it was a piece of a
religious book that he was set to copy, sometimes a poem, sometimes a fairy-tale. For the Egyptians were very
fond of fairy-tales, and later on, perhaps, we may hear some of their stories, the oldest fairy-stories in the
world. But generally the piece that was chosen was one which would not only exercise the boy's hand, and
teach him a good style, but would also help to teach him good manners, and fill his mind with right ideas.
Very often Tahuti's teacher would dictate to him a passage from the wise advice which a great King of long
ago left to his son, the Crown Prince, or from some other book of the same kind. And sometimes the exercises
would be in the form of letters which the master and his pupils wrote as though they had been friends far away
from one another. Tahuti's letters, you may be sure, were full of wisdom and of good resolutions, and I dare
say he was just about as fond of writing them as you are of writing the letters that your teacher sometimes sets
as a task for you.
When it came to Arithmetic, Tahuti was so far lucky that the number of rules he had to learn was very few.
His master taught him addition and subtraction, and a very slow and clumsy form of multiplication; but he
could not teach him division, for the very simple reason that he did not properly understand it himself.
Enough of mensuration was taught him to enable him to find out, though rather roughly, what was the size of
CHAPTER VI 20
a field, and how much corn would go into a granary of any particular size. And when he had learned these
things, his elementary education was pretty well over.
[Illustration: Plate 7 NAVE OF THE TEMPLE AT KARNAK. Pages 75, 76]
Of course a great deal would depend on the profession he was going to follow. If he was going to be only a
common scribe, his education would go no farther; for the work he would have to do would need no greater
learning than reading, writing, and arithmetic. If he was going to be an officer in the army, he entered as a
cadet in a military school which was attached to the royal stables. But if he was going to be a priest, he had to
join one of the colleges which belonged to the different temples of the gods, and there, like Moses, he was
instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was taught all the strange ideas which they had about the
gods, and the life after death, and the wonderful worlds, above and below, where the souls of men lived after
they had finished their lives on earth.
