Pharos The Egyptian
By Guy Boothby.
Illustrated by JOHN H. BACON
From The Windsor Magazine, June-December 1898
PREFACE.
BEING A LETTER FROM SIR WILLIAM BETFORD, OF BAMPTON ST. MARY, IN DORSETSHIRE,
TO GEORGE TREVELYAN, OF LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS, LONDON.
DEAR TREVELYAN,--
Never in my life have I been placed in such an awkward, not to say invidious, position. I am, as you know, a
plain man, fond of a plain life and plain speaking, and yet I am about to imperil that reputation by
Pharos The Egyptian 1
communicating to you what I fancy you will consider the most extraordinary and unbelievable intelligence
you have ever received in your life. For my own part I do not know what to think. I have puzzled over the
matter until I am not in a position to judge fairly. You must, therefore, weigh the evidence for us both. For
pity's sake, however, do not decide hastily. In dubiis benigniora semper sunt praeferenda, as they used to say
in our schooldays, must be our motto, and by it we must abide at any hazards. As far as I can see, we are
confronted with one of the saddest, and at the same time one of the most inexplicable cases ever yet recorded
on paper.
Reduced to its proper factors it stands as follows: Either Forrester has gone mad and dreamed it all, or he is
sane and has suffered as few others have done in this world. In either case he is deserving of our deepest pity.
In one way only are we fortunate. Knowing the man as we do, we are in a position to estimate the value of the
accusations he brings against himself. Of one thing I am convinced--a more honourable being does not walk
this earth. Our acquaintance with him is of equal length. We were introduced to him, and to each other, on one
and the same occasion, upwards of twelve years ago; and during that time, I know I am right in saying, neither
of us ever had reason to doubt his word, or the honour of a single action. Indeed, to my mind he had but one
fault, a not uncommon one in these latter days of the nineteenth century. I refer to his somewhat morbid
"'Go down and inquire his business,' I said, at length. 'Tell him I am engaged to-night; but if he can make it
convenient to call in the morning, I will see him.'
"The man departed on his errand, and by the time he returned I had reached my dressing-room once more.
"'He is very sorry, sir,' he began, as soon as he had closed the door, 'but he says he must get back to Bampton
in time to catch the 8.15 express to London. He wouldn't tell me his business, but asked me to say that it is
most important, and he would be deeply grateful if you could grant him an interview this evening.'
"'In that case,' I said, 'I suppose I must see him. Did he tell you no more?'
"'No, sir. Leastways, that wasn't exactly the way he put it. He said, sir, "If the gentleman won't see me
otherwise, tell him I come to him from Mr. Cyril Forrester. Then I think he will change his mind."'
"As the man, whoever he was, had predicted, this did make me change my mind. I immediately bade Jenkins
return and inform him that I would be with him in a few moments. Accordingly, as soon as I had dressed, I
left my room and descended to the study. The fire was burning brightly, and a reading-lamp stood upon the
writing-table. The remainder of the room, however, was in shadow, but not sufficiently so to prevent my
distinguishing a dark figure seated between the two bookcases. He rose as I entered, and bowed before me
with a servility that, thank God! is scarcely English. When he spoke, though what he said was grammatically
correct, his accent revealed the fact that he was not a native of our Isles.
"'Sir William Betford, I believe,' he began, as I entered the room.
"'That is my name,' I answered, at the same time turning up the lamp and lighting the candles upon the
mantelpiece in order that I might see him better. 'My man tells me you desire an interview with me. He also
mentioned that you have come from my old friend, Mr. Cyril Forrester, the artist, who is now abroad. Is this
true?'
"'Quite true,' he replied. 'I do come from Mr. Forrester.'
"The candles were burning brightly by this time, and, as a result, I was able to see him more distinctly. He was
of medium height, very thin, and wore a long overcoat of some dark material. His face was distinctly Asiatic
in type, though the exact nationality I could not determine. Possibly he might have hailed from Siam.
"'Having come from Mr. Forrester,' I said, when I had seated myself, 'you will be able to tell me his address. I
am one of his oldest, and certainly one of his firmest, friends.'
"'Nevertheless, I was instructed on no account to reveal his present residence to you,' the man replied.
"'What, then, can your business be with me?' I asked, more nettled at his words than I cared to show.
"'I have brought you a packet,' he said, 'which Mr. Forrester was most anxious I should personally deliver to
your hands. There is a letter inside which he said would explain everything. I was also instructed to obtain
from you a receipt, which I am to convey to him again.'
"So saying, he dived his hand into the pocket of his greatcoat, and brought thence a roll, which he placed with
some solemnity upon the table.
"'There is the packet,' he said. 'Now, if you will be kind enough to give me a note stating that you have
received it, I will take my departure. It is most necessary that I should catch the express to London, and if I
desire to do so, I have a sharp walk in front of me.'
By Guy Boothby. 3
"'You shall have the receipt,' I answered; and, taking a sheet of note-paper from a drawer, I wrote the
following letter :--
"THE GRANGE, BAMPTON St. MARY,
December 14, 18--.
"'DEAR FORRESTER,--This evening I have been surprised by a visit from a man named--'
"Here I paused and inquired the messenger's name, which I had, for the moment, forgotten.
"'Honor De Silva,' he replied.
"'--from a man named Honor De Silva, who has handed me a packet for which he desires this letter shall be a
receipt. I have endeavoured to elicit your address from him, but on this point he is adamant. Is it kind to an old
friend to let him hear from you, but at the same time to refuse to permit him to communicate with you? Why
all this mystery? If you are in trouble, who would so gladly share it with you as your old friend? If you need
help, who would so willingly give it? Are the years during which we have known each other to count for
nothing? Trust me, and I think you are aware that I will not abuse your confidence.
"'Your affectionate friend, '"WILLIAM BETFORD.'
"Having blotted it, I placed the letter in an envelope, directed it to Cyril Forrester, Esq., and handed it to De
Silva, who placed it carefully in an inner pocket and rose to take leave of me.
"'Will nothing induce you to reveal your employer's present place of residence?' I said. 'I assure you I am most
anxious to prove his friend.'
"'I can easily believe that,' he answered. 'He has often spoken of you in terms of the warmest affection. If you
could hear him, I am sure you would have no doubt on that score."
"I was much affected, as you may imagine, on hearing this, and his assertion emboldened me to risk yet
another question.
"'Upon one point, at least, you can set my mind at rest,' I said. 'Is Mr. Forrester happy?'
"'He is a man who has done with happiness such as you mean, and will never know it again,' he answered
solemnly.
"'My poor old friend,' I said, half to myself and half to him; and then added, 'Is there no way in which I can
help him?'
"'None,' De Silva replied. 'But I can tell you no more, so I beg you will not ask me.'
"'But you can surely answer one other question,' I continued, this time with what was almost a note of
supplication in my voice. 'You can tell me whether, in your opinion, we, his friends, will see him again, or if
he intends to spend the remainder of his life in exile?'
"'That I can safely answer. No! You will never see him again. He will not return to this country, or to the
people who have known him here.'
"'Then may God help him and console him, for his trouble must be bitter indeed!'
By Guy Boothby. 4
"'It is well-nigh insupportable,' said De Silva, with the same solemnity; and then, picking up his hat, bowed,
and moved towards the door.
"'I must risk one last question. Tell me if he will communicate with me again?'
"'Never,' the other replied. 'He bade me tell you, should you ask, that you must henceforth consider him as one
who is dead. You must not attempt to seek for him, but consign him to that oblivion in which only he can be
at peace.'
"Before I could say more he had opened the door and passed into the hall. A moment later I heard the front
door close behind him, a step sounded on the gravel before my window, and I was left standing upon the
hearthrug, staring at the packet upon the table. Then the gong sounded, and I thrust the roll into a drawer.
Having securely locked the latter, I hastened to the drawing-room to meet my guests.
"Needless to say, my demeanour during dinner was not marked with any great degree of gaiety. The interview
with De Silva had upset me completely; and though I endeavoured to play the part of an attentive host, my
attempt was far from being successful. I found my thoughts continually reverting to that curious interview in
the study, and to the packet which had come into my possession in such a mysterious manner, the secret
contained in which I had still to learn.
"After dinner we adjourned to the billiard-room, where we spent the evening; consequently it was not until my
guests bade me 'Good-night,' and retired to their various rooms, by which time it was well after eleven
o'clock, that I found myself at liberty to return to the study.
"Once there, I made up the fire, wheeled an easy chair to a position before it, arranged the reading lamp so
that the light should fall upon the paper over my left shoulder, and having made these preparations, unlocked
the drawer and took out the packet De Silva had handed to me.
"It was with a mixture of pain, a small measure of curiosity, but more apprehension as to what I should find
within, that I cut the string and broke the seals. Inside I discovered a note and a roll of manuscript in that fine
and delicate handwriting we used to know so well. After a hasty glance at it, I put the latter aside, and opened
the envelope. The note I found within was addressed to you, Trevelyan, as well as to myself, and read as
follows :--
"'MY DEAR OLD FRIENDS,--In company with many other people, you must have wondered what the
circumstances could have been that induced me to leave England so suddenly, to forfeit the success I had won
for myself after so much uphill work, and, above all, to bid farewell to a life and an art I loved so devotedly,
and from which, I think I may be excused for saying, I had such brilliant expectations. I send you herewith,
Betford, by a bearer I can trust, an answer to that question. I want you to read it, and, having done so, to
forward it to George Trevelyan, with the request that he will do the same. When you have mastered the
contents, you must unitedly arrange with some publishing house to put it before the world, omitting nothing,
and in no way attempting to offer any extenuation for my conduct. We three were good friends once, in an age
as dead to me now as the Neolithic. For the sake of that friendship, therefore, I implore this favour at your
hands. As you hope for mercy on that Last Great Day, when the sins of all men shall be judged, do as I entreat
you now. How heavily I have sinned against my fellow-men--in ignorance, it is true --you will know when
you have read what I have written. This much is certain--the effect of it weighs upon my soul like lead. If you
have any desire to make that load lighter, carry out the wish I now express to you. Remember me also in your
prayers, praying not as for a man still living, but as you would for one long since dead. That God may bless
and keep you both will ever be the wish of your unhappy friend,
"CYRIL FORRESTER."
By Guy Boothby. 5
"'P.S.--Matthew Simpford, in the Strand, is keeping two pictures for me. They were once considered among
my best work. I ask you each to accept one, and when you look at them, try to think as kindly as possible of
the friend who is gone from you for ever.'
* * * * *
"So much for the letter. It is possible there may be people who will smile sarcastically when they read that, as
I finished it, tears stood in my eyes, so that I could scarcely see the characters upon the paper.
"You, Trevelyan, I know, will understand my emotion better. And why should I not have been affected?
Forrester and I had been good friends in the old days, and it was only fit and proper I should mourn his loss.
Handsome, generous, clever, who could help loving him? I could not, that's certain.
"The letter finished, I replaced it in its envelope and turned my attention to the manuscript. When I began to
read, the hands of the clock upon the chimney-piece stood at twenty minutes to twelve, and they had reached a
quarter past five before I had completed my task. All that time I read on without stopping, filled with
amazement at the story my poor friend had to tell, and consumed with a great sorrow that his brilliant career
should have terminated in such an untoward manner.
"Now, having completed my share of the task, as required of me in the letter, I send the manuscript by special
messenger to you. Read it as he desires, and when you have done so, let me have your opinion upon it. Then I
will come up to town, and we will arrange to carry out the last portion of our poor friend's request together. In
the meantime,
"Believe me ever your friend,
"WILLIAM BETFORD."
* * * * *
Six months later.
Trevelyan and I have completed the task allotted to us. We have read Forrester's manuscript, and we have also
discovered a publisher who will place it before the world. What the result is to be it remains for time to
decide.
By Guy Boothby. 6
CHAPTER I.
IF ever a man in this world had a terrible--I might almost go so far as to add a shameful--story to relate, surely
I, Cyril Forrester, am that one. How strange--indeed, how most unbelievable--it is I do not think I even
realized myself until I sat down to write it. The question the world will in all probability ask when it has read
it is, why it should have been told at all. It is possible it may be of opinion that I should have served my
generation just as well had I allowed it to remain locked up in my own bosom for all time. This, however, my
conscience would not permit. There are numberless reasons, all of them important and some imperative
beyond all telling, why I should make my confession, though God knows I am coward enough to shrink from
the task. And, if you consider for a moment, I think you will understand why. In the first place, the telling of
the story can only have the effect of depriving me of the affection of those I love, the respect of those whose
good opinion I have hitherto prized so highly, the sympathy of my most faithful friends, and, what is an equal
sacrifice as far as I am personally concerned--though it is, perhaps, of less importance to others--the fame I
have won for myself after so hard a struggle. All this is swept away like driftwood before a rising tide, and as
a result I retire into voluntary exile, a man burdened with a lifelong sorrow. How I have suffered, both 'in
body and mind, none will ever understand. That I have been punished is also certain, how heavily you, my
two old friends, will be able to guess when you have read my story. With the writing of it I have severed the
last link that binds me to the civilized world. Henceforth I shall be a wanderer and an outcast, and but for one
reason could wish myself dead. But that is enough of regret--let me commence my story.
Two years ago, as you both have terrible reason to remember, there occurred in Europe what may, perhaps, be
justly termed the most calamitous period in its history, a time so heart-breaking that scarcely a man or woman
can look back upon it without experiencing the keenest sorrow. Needless to say I refer to the outbreak of the
plague among us, that terrible pestilence which swept Europe from end to end, depopulated its greatest cities,
filled every burial place to overflowing, and caused such misery and desolation in all ranks of life as has never
before been known among us. Few homes were there, even in this fair England of ours, but suffered some
bereavement; few families but mourn a loss the wound of which has even now barely healed. And it is my
part in this dreadful business that I have forced myself with so much bitter humiliation to relate. Let me begin
at the very beginning, tell everything plainly and straightforwardly, offer nothing in extenuation of my
conduct, and trust only to the world to judge me, if such a thing be possible, with an unbiassed mind.
I date my misery from a wet, miserable night in the last week of March--a night without a glimpse of the
moon, which, on that particular evening, was almost at its full. There had been but one solitary hour of
painting-light all day; short as it was, however, it was sufficient for my purpose. My picture for the Academy
was finished, and now all that remained was to pack it up and send it in. It was, as you remember, my eighth,
and in every way my most successful effort. The subject I had chosen had enthralled me, from the moment it
had first entered my head, and the hours of thought and preparation it had entailed will always rank amongst
the happiest of my life. It represented Merenptah, the Pharaoh of the Exodus, learning from the magicians the
effect of his obstinacy in the death of his first-born son. The canvas showed him seated on his throne, clad in
his robes of state. His head was pushed a little forward, his chin rested in his hand, while his eyes looked
straight before him as though he were endeavouring to peer into the future in the hope of reading there the
answer to the troubled thoughts inside his brain. Behind him stood the sorcerers, one of whom had found
courage to announce the baneful tidings.
The land of Egypt has always possessed a singular attraction for me--a taste which, doubtless, I inherit from
my poor father, who, as you are aware, was one of the greatest authorities upon the subject the world has ever
known.
As I have said, it was a miserable night, dark as the pit of Tophet. A biting wind whistled through the streets,
the pavements were dotted with umbrella-laden figures, the kennels ran like mill-sluices, while the roads were
only a succession of lamp-lit puddles through which the wheeled traffic splashed continuously. For some
reason--perhaps because the work upon which I had been so long and happily engaged was finished, and I felt
CHAPTER I. 7
lonely without it to occupy my mind--I was stricken with a fit of the blues. Convinced that my own company
would not take me out of it, I left my studio in search of more congenial society. This was soon forthcoming;
and you will remember, Betford and Trevelyan, that we dined together at a little restaurant in the
neighbourhood of Leicester Square, and followed the dinner up with a visit to a theatre. As ill-luck would
have it, I was in the minority in the choice of a place of entertainment. The result was disastrous. Instead of
ridding myself of my melancholy, as I had hoped to do, I intensified it, and when, at the end of the evening, I
bade you farewell in the Strand, my spirits had reached a lower level than they had attained all day. I
remember distinctly standing beneath a gas-lamp at the corner of Villiers Street, as the clocks were striking
midnight, feeling disinclined to return to my abode and go to bed, and yet equally at a loss to know in what
manner I should employ myself until there was some likelihood of slumber visiting my eyelids. To help me
make up my mind I lit a fresh cigar and strolled down towards the river. On the pavement, at the foot of the
steps leading to Hungerford Bridge, a poor tattered creature, yet still possessing some pretensions to
gentlemanly address, came from beneath the archway and begged of me, assuring me most solemnly that, as
far as he was concerned, the game was played out, and if I did not comply with his request, he would
forthwith end his troubles in the river. I gave him something--I cannot now remember what--and then,
crossing the road, made my way along the Embankment towards Cleopatra's Needle. The rain had ceased for
the moment, and in the north a few stars were shining. The myriad lights of the Embankment were reflected in
the river like lines of dancing fire, and I remember that behind me a train was rolling across the bridge from
Charing Cross with a noise like distant thunder. I suppose I must have been thinking of my picture, and of the
land and period which had given me the idea. At any rate, I know that on this occasion the ancient monument,
in front of which I soon found myself, affected me as it had never done before. I thought of the centuries that
had passed since those hieroglyphics were carved upon the stone, of the changes the world had seen since that
giant monolith first saw the light of day. Leaning my elbows on the parapet, I was so absorbed in my own
thoughts that when a sudden cry of "Help, help!" rang out from the river it was with a sensible shock that I
returned to the commonplace and found myself standing where I was. A moment later I was all action. The
cry had come from the other side of the Needle. I accordingly hastened to the steps farthest from me, shouting,
as I went, in my excitement, that a man was drowning. It might have all been part of some evil dream : the
long line of silent Embankment on either side, the swiftly-flowing river, and that despairing appeal for help
coming so suddenly out of the black darkness. Then I became aware that I was not alone on the steps. There
was another man there, and he stood motionless, peering out into the dark stream, scarcely a dozen paces from
me.
I had reached the top of the steps and was about to descend them in order to accost him, when something
occurred which stopped me and held me spell-bound. The moon had emerged from its pall of cloud and was
now shining clear and bright across the river. Thirty seconds must have elapsed since we had heard the cry for
assistance, and now, as I looked, the drowning man was washed in at the foot of the steps upon which we
stood. It would have needed but the least movement on the part of the man below me to have caught him as he
swept by and to have saved him from a watery death. To my amazement, however--and even now, after this
lapse of time, my gorge rises at the very thought of it--the other did not offer to help, but drew himself back.
Before I could return my eyes, the wretched suicide had passed out of sight and had vanished into the
darkness again. As he did so a pronounced chuckle of enjoyment reached me from the man below--a burst of
merriment so out of place and so detestable that I could scarcely believe I heard aright. I cannot hope to make
you understand how it affected me. A second later a fit of blind fury overtook me, and, under the influence of
it, I ran down the steps and seized the murderer--for such I shall always consider him--by the arm.
"Are you a man or a fiend," I cried in jerks, "that you could so allow another to perish when you might have
saved him? His death is upon your conscience, brute and monster that you are!"
So extreme was my emotion that I trembled under it like a man with the palsy.
Then the other turned his head and looked at me; and, as he did so, a great shudder, accompanied by an
indescribable feeling of nausea, passed over me. What occasioned it I could not tell, nor could I remember
CHAPTER I. 8
having felt anything of the kind before. When it departed, my eyes fixed themselves on the individual before
me. Connecting him in some way with the unenviable sensation I had just experienced, I endeavoured to
withdraw them again, but in vain. The other's gaze was rivetted upon me--so firmly, indeed, that it required
but small imagination to believe it eating into my brain. Good heavens! how well I recollect that night and
every incident connected with it! I believe I shall remember it through all eternity. If only I had known enough
to have taken him by the throat then and there, and had dashed his brains out on the stones, or to have seized
him in my arms and hurled him down the steps into the river below, how much happier I should have been! I
might have earned eternal punishment, it is true, but I should at least have saved myself and the world in
general from such misery as the human brain can scarcely realize. But I did not know, the opportunity was
lost, and, in that brief instant of time, millions of my fellow-creatures were consigned unwittingly to their
doom.
After long association with an individual, it is difficult, if not impossible, to set down with any degree of
exactness a description of the effect his personality in the first, instance had upon one. In this case I find it
more than usually difficult, for the reason that, as I came more under his influence, the original effect wore off
and quite another was substituted for it.
His height was considerably below the average, his skull was as small as his shoulders were broad. But it was
not his stature, his shoulders, or the size of the head which caused the curious effect I have elsewhere
described. It was his eyes, the shape of his face, the multitudinous wrinkles that lined it, and, above all, the
extraordinary colour of his skin, that rendered his appearance so repulsive. To understand what I mean you
must think first of old ivory, and then endeavour to realize what the complexion of a corpse would be like
after lying in an hermetically sealed tomb for many years. Blend the two, and you will have some dim notion
of the idea I am trying to convey. His eyes were small, deeply sunken, and in repose apparently devoid of
light and even of life. He wore a heavy fur coat, and, for the reason that he disdained the customary headgear
of polite society, and had substituted for it a curious description of cap, I argued that he was a man who
boasted a will of his own, and who did not permit himself to be bound by arbitrary rules. But, however plain
these things may have been, his age was a good deal more difficult to determine. It was certainly not less than
seventy, and one might have been excused had one even set it down at a hundred. He walked feebly,
supporting himself with a stick, upon which his thin yellow fist was clutched till the knuckles stood out and
shone like billiard balls in the moonlight.
Under the influence of his mysterious personality, I stood speechless for some moments, forgetful of
everything--the hour, the place, and even his inhumanity to the drowning wretch in the river below. By the
time I recovered myself he was gone, and I could see him crossing the road and moving swiftly away in the
direction of Charing Cross. Drawing my hand across my forehead, which was clammy with the sweat of real
fear, I looked again at the river. A police boat was pulling towards the steps, and by the light of the lantern on
board I could make out the body of a man. My nerves, already strained to breaking pitch, were not capable of
standing any further shock. I accordingly turned upon my heel and hurried from the place with all the speed at
my command.
Such was my first meeting with the man whom I afterwards came to know as Pharos the Egyptian.
CHAPTER I. 9
CHAPTER II.
AS you are aware, my picture that year was hung in an excellent position, was favourably received by those
for whose criticism I had any sort of respect, attracted its fair share of attention from the general public, and,
as a result, brought me as near contentment as a man can well hope or expect to be in this world. Before it had
been twenty-four hours "on the line," I had received several tempting offers for it; but as I had set my heart on
obtaining a certain sum, and was determined not to accept less, you may suppose I did not give them much
attention. If I received what I wanted, I promised myself a treat I had been looking forward to all my life. In
that case I would take a long holiday, and instead of spending the next winter in England, would start for
Egypt in the autumn, taking in Italy en route, make my way up the Nile, and be home again, all being well, in
the spring, or, at latest, during the early days of summer.
Ever since I first became an exhibitor at Burlington House, I have made it a rule to studiously avoid visiting
the gallery after varnishing day. My reasons would interest no one, but they were sufficiently strong to induce
me to adhere to them. This year, however, I was led into doing so in a quite unintentional fashion, and as that
exception vitally concerns this narrative, I must explain the circumstances that led up to it in detail.
On a certain Friday, early in June, I was sitting in my studio, after lunch, wondering what I should do with
myself during the afternoon, when a knock sounded at the door, and a moment later, after I had invited
whoever stood outside to enter, my old friend, George Merridew, his wife, son, and three daughters, trooped
into the room. They were plainly up from the country, and, as usual, were doing the sights at express speed.
George Merridew, as you know, stands six feet in his stockings, and is broad in proportion. His face is red, his
eyes blue, and he carries with him wherever he goes the air of a prosperous country squire, which he certainly
is. Like many other big men, he is unconscious of his strength, and when he shakes hands with you, you have
reason to remember the fact for five minutes afterwards. His wife is small, and, as some folk declare, looks
younger than her eldest daughter, who is a tennis champion, a golfer, and boasts a supreme contempt for
Royal Academicians and, for that matter, for artists generally. The son is at Oxford, a nice enough young
fellow with limpid blue eyes, who, to his father's disgust, takes no sort of interest in fox-hunting, racing,
football, or any other sport, and has openly asserted his intention of entering the Church in the near future.
There are two other girls, Gwendoline and Ethel--the latter, by the way, promises to be a second edition of her
mother --who, at present, are in the advanced schoolroom stage, dine with their parents, except on state
occasions, and play duets together on the piano with a conscientious regard for time and fingering that gives
their father no small amount of pleasure, but with other people rather detracts from the beauty of the
performance.
"Thank goodness, we have got you at last!" cried Merridew, as he rushed forward and gripped my hand with a
cordiality that made me suffer in silent agony for minutes afterwards. "But, my dear fellow, what on earth
induces you to live in a place that's so difficult to find? We have been all round the neighbourhood, here,
there, and everywhere, making inquiries, and shouldn't have found you now had it not been for an intelligent
butcher-boy, who put us on the right scent and enabled us to run you to earth at last."
"Such is fame, you see," I answered with a smile. One should be humble when one reflects that the knowledge
of one's address is confined to a butcher-boy. "How do you do, Mrs. Merridew? I am sorry you should have
had so much difficulty in discovering my poor abode."
I shook hands with the rest of the family, and, when I had done so, waited to be informed as to the reason of
their visit.
"Now, look here," said the Squire, as he spoke, producing an enormous gold repeater from his pocket, which
by sheer force of habit he held in his hand, though he never once looked at it during the time he was speaking.
"I'll tell you what we're going to do. In the first place, you're to take us to the Academy to see your picture,
which every one is talking about, and at the same time to act as showman and tell us who's who. After that
CHAPTER II. 10
you'll dine with us at the Langham, and go to the theatre afterwards. No, no, it's not a bit of use your
pretending you've got another engagement. We don't come up to town very often, but when we do we enjoy
ourselves, and--why, man alive! just consider--I haven't seen you since last autumn, and if you think I'm going
to let you escape now, you're very much mistaken. Such a thing is not to be thought of, is it, mother?"
Thus appealed to, Mrs. Merridew was kind enough to say that she hoped I would comply with her husband's
wishes. The daughters murmured something, which I have no doubt was intended to be a complimentary
expression of their feelings, while the son commenced a remark, failed to make himself intelligible, and then
lapsed into silence again.
Thus hemmed in, it remained for me to invent a valid excuse, or to fall in with their plans. I effected a
compromise, informed them that I should be very pleased to accompany them to the Academy, but that it was
quite impossible I should dine with them afterwards, or even visit the theatre in their company, having, as was
quite true, already accepted an invitation for that evening. Five minutes later the matter was settled, and we
were making our way towards Piccadilly and Burlington House.
In the light of all that has happened since, I can only regard my behaviour on that occasion with a
contemptuous sort of pity. The minutest details connected with that afternoon's amusement are as clearly
photographed upon my brain as if it had only occurred but yesterday. If I close my eyes for a moment, I can
see, just as I saw it then, the hawkers selling catalogues in the busy street outside, the great courtyard with the
lines of waiting carriages, the fashionable crowd ascending and descending the stairs, and inside the rooms
that surging mass of well-dressed humanity so characteristic of London and the Season. When we had fought
our way to the vestibule, I was for doing the round of the rooms in the orthodox fashion. This, however, it
appeared, was by no means to George Merridew's taste. He received my suggestion with appropriate scorn.
"Come, come, old fellow," he replied, "we're first going to see your picture. It was that which brought us here;
and, as soon as I have told you what I think of it, the rest of the daubs may go hang as far as I am concerned."
Now, it is an indisputable fact that, whatever Nature may, or may not, have done for me, she has at least
endowed me with an extremely sensitive disposition. My feelings, therefore, may be imagined when I tell you
that my old friend spoke in a voice that was quite audible above the polite murmur of the crowd, and which
must have penetrated to the farthest end of the room. Not content with that, he saluted me with a sounding
smack on the back, bidding me, at the same time, consign my modesty to the winds, for everybody knew--by
everybody, I presume he meant his neighbours in the country--that I was the rising man of the day, and would
inevitably be elected President before I died. To avert this flood of idiotic compliment, and feeling myself
growing hot from head to foot, I took him by the arm and conducted him hastily through the room towards
that portion of the building where my picture was displayed.
Whether the work was good, bad, or indifferent, the public at least paid me the compliment of bestowing their
attention upon it, and their behaviour on this occasion was no exception to the rule. I hope I shall not be
considered more conceited than my fellows; at the risk of it, however, I must confess to a feeling of pride as I
glanced, first at the crowd wedged in before the rail, and then at the party by my side. George Merridew's face
alone was worth the trouble and time I had spent upon the canvas. His eyes were opened to their fullest extent;
his lips were also parted, but no sound came from them. Even the face of my formidable friend, the tennis
champion, betrayed a measure of interest that, in the light of her previous behaviour, was more than flattering.
For some moments we stood together on the outskirts of the throng. Then those who were directly in front
moved away, and my friends immediately stepped into the gap and took their places. As there was no reason
why I should follow their example, I remained outside, watching the faces and noting the different effects the
picture produced upon them.
I had not been alone more than a few seconds, however, before I became conscious of a curious sensation. It
was accompanied by a lowering of the pulse that was quite perceptible, followed by an extraordinary feeling
CHAPTER II. 11
of nausea. I battled against it in vain. The room and its occupants began to swim before me. I tottered, and at
length, being unable any longer to support myself, sat down on the seat behind me. When I looked up again I
could scarcely credit the evidence of my senses. Approaching me from the crowd, leaning upon his stick, just
as I remembered him on the previous occasion, and dressed in the same extraordinary fashion, was the old
man whose personality had given me such a shock at the foot of Cleopatra's Needle. His face was as thin and
as wrinkled as I had seen it then, and I also noticed that he wore the same indescribable look of cruelty and
cunning that I remembered so well. One thing was quite plain, however profoundly I may have been affected
by my proximity to this singular being, I was not the only one who came within the sphere of his influence.
Indeed, it was strange to notice the manner in which the polite crowd drew away from him, and the different
expressions upon their faces as they stepped aside in order to give him room to pass. Had he been a snake,
they could scarcely have shown a more unanimous desire to withdraw from his neighbourhood. On this
occasion he was evidently not alone. I gathered this from the fact that, as soon as he had emerged from the
crowd, he paused as if to wait for a companion. A moment later a woman came to his side--a woman who
carried herself like a daughter of the gods; the most beautiful creature, I can safely assert, that I have ever seen
either in this or any other country. If her companion's height was below the average, hers was at least several
inches above it. But it was neither her stature, the exquisite symmetry of her figure, the beauty of her face, the
luxuriance of her hair, nor the elegance of her attire that fascinated me. It was the expression I saw in her dark,
lustrous eyes.
It is essential to my profession that I should be continually studying the human face, attempting to obtain from
it some clue as to the character of the owner, and learning to read in it the workings of the mind within.
And what I read in this woman's face was a sorrow that nothing could assuage, a hopelessness that was not
limited to this earth, but was fast passing into the eternal.
Having once freed herself from the crowd, who, you may be sure, turned and stared after her as if she were
some rare and beautiful animal, she took her place at her companion's side, and they passed along the room
together, finally disappearing through the archway at the farther end. A moment later the eldest of my friend's
daughters joined me. I had never credited her with the possession of so much emotion as she displayed at that
moment.
"Mr. Forrester," she said, "I want you to tell me if you have ever seen anything so awful as that old man's
face?"
"I think I can safely say that I never have," I answered; and then, in an attempt to conceal the emotion I was
still feeling, added, "I wonder who he can be?"
"I cannot imagine," she continued; "but I'm certain of this, that I never want to see him again."
At that moment we were joined by the remainder of the family.
"By Jove! Forrester," said the squire, but without his usual heartiness, "I don't know what is coming to this
place. Did you see that little chap in the fur coat and skull cap who came out of the crowd just now with that
fine-looking woman behind him? You may scarcely credit it, but his face gave me quite a turn. I haven't got
over it yet."
"The girl with him was very beautiful," murmured his wife gently; "but there was something about her face
that struck me as being very sad. I should like to know what relationship she bears to him."
"His granddaughter, I should imagine," said Miss Merridew, who was still watching the entrance to the next
room as if she expected them to return.
CHAPTER II. 12
"Nonsense!" cried the squire impatiently. "His great-granddaughter, you mean. I'll stake my reputation that the
old fellow is as old as Methuselah. What say you, Forrester?"
I cannot now remember what answer I returned. I only know that we presently found ourselves on the
pavement of Piccadilly, saying good-bye, and expressing our thanks in an aimless sort of fashion for the
pleasure we had derived from each other's society.
Having seen them safely on their way towards Regent Street, I strolled along Piccadilly in the direction of my
studio, thinking as I went of that terrible old man whose personality had twice given me such a shock, and
also of the beautiful woman, his companion. The effect they had produced upon me must have been
something out of the common, for I soon discovered that I could think of nothing else. It was in vain I looked
in at my club and attempted to engage in conversation with friends, or that, when I reached home, I threw
myself into an easy-chair and endeavoured to interest myself in a book. Out of the centre of every page peered
that wicked old face, with its pallid, wrinkled skin, and lacklustre eyes. For upwards of an hour I wrestled
with the feeling, but without success. The man's image was not conducive to peace of mind, and I knew very
well that unless I found some distraction I should be dreaming of him at night. Accordingly I rose from my
chair and crossed the room to a table on which stood a large Satsuma bowl, in which it was my custom to
place the invitations I received. That evening fortune favoured me. I had the choice of four houses. Two I
rejected without a second thought; between the others I scarcely knew how to decide. Though I was not aware
of it, my evil destiny, for the second time that day, was standing at my elbow, egging me on to ruin. It
appeared I had the choice of a dance in the Cromwell Road, another in Belgrave Square; private theatricals in
Queen's Gate, and a musical "at home" in Eaton Square. I did not feel equal to dances or private theatricals,
and, thinking music would soothe my troubled mind, I decided for Eaton Square, and in so doing brought
about the misery and downfall of my life.
Nine o'clock that evening, accordingly, found me ascending the staircase of Medenham House, greeting my
hostess in the anteroom, and passing thence into the great drawing-room beyond. There is not a more
conspicuous power within the range of her hobby than her ladyship, and at her house one hears all that is
newest and most likely to be famous in the musical world. Many now celebrated artistes owe much of what
they have since achieved to the helping hand she held out to them when they were struggling up the rugged
hill of Fame.
On entering the room I looked about me in the hope of finding some one I knew, but for some moments was
unsuccessful. Then I espied, seated in a corner, almost hidden by a magnificent palm, a man with whom I
possessed some slight acquaintance. I strolled towards him, and after a few moments' conversation took my
place at his side. He had himself achieved considerable success as an amateur violinist, and was a distant
relative of our hostess.
"I suppose, like the rest of us, you have come to hear Lady Medenham's latest prodigy?" he said, after the
usual polite nothings had been said.
"I am ashamed to confess I have heard nothing at all about him," I answered.
"Her, my dear sir," he replied, with a little laugh. "Our hostess says she is marvellous."
"A pianist?"
"Indeed, no! A violinist, and with, I believe, the additional advantage of being a very beautiful woman. Lady
Medenham met her in Munich, and has raved about her ever since. Needless to say, she invited her to visit her
as soon as she reached London."
What the connection could have been it is impossible to say, but by some occult reasoning I instantly
CHAPTER II. 13
associated this new wonder with the magnificent creature I had seen at Burlington House that afternoon.
"You have already made her acquaintance, I presume?" I said in a tone of mild curiosity.
"No such luck," he answered. "I have not been permitted that pleasure. From all accounts, however, she is
really very wonderful. All the people I have met who have heard her declare they have never known anything
like her playing. And the funniest part of it is, she is accompanied everywhere by a man who is as physically
repulsive as she is beautiful."
"A little old man with an extraordinary complexion, deep-set, horrible eyes, who wears a fur coat and a
peculiar cap in the height of the Season, and looks at least a hundred years old?"
"From all accounts you describe him exactly. Where did you meet him?"
"I saw them both at the Academy this afternoon," I answered. "She is, as you say, very beautiful; but she
scarcely struck me as being English."
"She is not. She is Hungarian, I believe, but she has travelled a great deal and speaks English perfectly."
"And her companion--what nation has the honour of claiming him as her son?"
"Ah, that I cannot tell you! He is a mystery, for no one seems to know anything about him. Nor is it at all
certain what relationship he bears to the woman. But see, here is Lord Medenham. The performance is
evidently about to commence."
As he spoke there was a general turning of heads in the direction of the anteroom, and almost simultaneously
my hostess entered the room, accompanied by the exquisite creature I had seen emerging from the crowd
before my picture that afternoon. If she had looked beautiful then, she was doubly so now. Dressed to
perfection, as on the previous occasion, she towered head and shoulders above Lady Medenham, who is
generally considered tall for her sex, and carried herself with a more imperial grace than is boasted by any
empress I have ever seen.
A few paces behind her followed the man who had been her companion that afternoon. On this occasion, also
he disdained the orthodox style of dress, wore a black velvet coat, closely buttoned beneath his chin, and upon
his head a skull cap of the same material. As on the previous occasions, he walked with a stick, leaning upon
it heavily like an old man of ninety. Reaching that portion of the room in which the piano was situated, he
dropped into a chair, without waiting for his hostess to seat herself, and, laying his head back, closed his eyes,
as if the exertion of walking had been too much for him. A servant, who had followed close behind, wrapped
a heavy rug about his knees, and then withdrew. Meanwhile his beautiful companion stood for a moment
looking down at him, and then, with a little gesture, the significance of which I could not then interpret,
accepted her hostess's invitation and seated herself beside her.
The first item on the programme was a nocturne, rendered by the composer, a famous pianist who at the time
was delighting all London. He seated himself at the piano and began to play. I am afraid, however, I spared
but small attention for his performance. My interest was centred on that huddled-up figure under the fur rug
and the beautiful creature at his side. Then a change came, and once more I experienced the same sensation of
revulsion that had overwhelmed me twice before. Again I felt sick and giddy; once more a clammy sweat
broke out upon my forehead, and at last, unable any longer to control myself, I rose from my seat.
"What on earth is the matter?" inquired my friend, who had been watching me. "Are you ill?"
"I believe I'm going to faint," I replied. "I must get into the air. But there is no necessity for you to come. I
CHAPTER II. 14
shall be all right alone."
So saying, I signed him back to his seat, and, slipping quietly from the corner, made my way through the
anteroom into the marble corridor beyond. Once there, I leant against the balustrading of the staircase and
endeavoured to pull myself together. A groom of the chambers, who was passing at the time, seeing there was
something amiss, approached and inquired if he could be of service.
"I am feeling a little faint," I replied. "The heat of the drawing-room was too much for me. If you can get me a
little brandy, I think I shall be quite well in a few moments."
The man departed, and presently came back with the spirit I had asked for. With the return of my
self-possession I endeavoured to arrive at an understanding of what had occasioned the attack. I was not
subject to fainting-fits, but was, in every respect, as strong as the majority of my fellow-creatures.
"It's all nonsense," I said to myself, "to ascribe it to that old fellow's presence. How could such a thing affect
me? At any rate, I'll try the experiment once more."
So saying, I returned to the drawing-room.
I was only just in time, for, as I entered, the lady who had hitherto been seated by her hostess's side, rose from
her chair and moved towards the piano, and, as no one else stirred, it was plain that she was going to dispense
with the services of an accompanist. Taking her violin from a table, she drew her bow gently across the
strings, and, when she had tuned it, stood looking straight before her down the room. How beautiful she was
at that moment I cannot hope to make you understand. Then she began to play. What the work was I did not
then know, but I have since discovered that it was her own. It opened with a movement in the minor--low and
infinitely sad. There was a note of unappeasable yearning in it, a cry that might well have been wrung from a
heart that was breaking beneath the weight of a deadly sin; a weird, unearthly supplication for mercy from a
soul that was beyond redemption or the reach of hope. None but a great musician could have imagined such a
theme, and then only under the influence of a supreme despair. While it lasted her audience sat spell-bound.
There was scarcely one among them who was not a lover of music, and many were world-famous for their
talent. This, however, was such playing as none of us had ever heard before, or, indeed, had even dreamed of.
Then, by imperceptible gradations, the music reached its height, and died slowly down, growing fainter and
fainter, until it expired in a long-drawn sob. Absolute silence greeted its termination. Not a hand was raised;
not a word was uttered. If proof were wanting of the effect she had produced, it was to be found in this. The
violinist bowed, a trifle disdainfully, I thought, and, having placed her instrument on the table once more,
returned to Lady Medenham's side. Then a young German singer and his accompanist crossed the room and
took their places at the piano. The famous pianist, who had first played, followed the singer, and, when he had
resumed his seat, the violinist rose and once more took up her instrument.
This time there was no pause. With an abruptness that was startling, she burst into a wild, barbaric dance. The
notes sprang and leapt upon each other in joyous confusion, creating an enthusiasm that was as instantaneous
as it was remarkable. It was a tarantella of the wildest description--nay, I should rather say, a dance of Satyrs.
The player's eyes flashed above the instrument, her lithe, exquisite figure rocked and swayed beneath the spell
of the emotion she was conjuring up. Faster and faster her bow swept across the strings, and, as before, though
now for a very different reason, her audience sat fascinated before her. The first work had been the outcome
of despair, this was the music of unqualified happiness, of the peculiar joy of living--nay, of the very essence
and existence of life itself. Then it ceased as suddenly as it had begun, and once more she bowed, put down
her violin, and approached her hostess. The programme was at an end, and the enthusiastic audience clustered
round to congratulate her. For my own part I was curiously ill at ease. In a vague sort of fashion I had
appropriated her music to myself, and now I resented the praise the fashionable mob was showering upon her.
Accordingly I drew back a little, and made up my mind to get through the crowd and slip quietly away. By the
time I was able to emerge from my corner, however, there was a movement at the end of the room, and it
CHAPTER II. 15
became evident that the player and her companion were also about to take their departure. Accompanied by
Lord and Lady Medenham, they approached the spot where I was standing, endeavouring to reach the door.
Had it been possible I would have taken shelter behind my palm again in order that my presence might not
have been observed. But it was too late. Lady Medenham had caught my eye, and now stopped to speak.
"Mr. Forrester," she said, "we have been permitted a great treat to-night, have we not? You must let me
introduce you to the Frulein Valere de Vocxqal."
I bowed, and, despite the fact, that, regarded in the light of her genius, such a thing was little better than an
insult, followed the example of my betters, and murmured a complimentary allusion to her playing and the
pleasure she had given us. She thanked me, all the time watching me with grave, attentive eyes, into which
there had suddenly flashed a light that was destined to puzzle me for a long time, and the reason of which I
could not understand. Then came the crucial moment, when Lady Medenham turned to me again, and said--
"Mr. Forrester, Monsieur Pharos has expressed a desire to be introduced to you. I told him yesterday I thought
you would be here to-night. May I have the pleasure of making you acquainted with each other?"
Those cold, dead eyes fixed themselves steadily on mine, and, under their influence, I felt as if my brain were
freezing.
"I am indeed honoured, sir," he said, "and I trust I may be permitted to express a hope of enlarging our
acquaintance. I understand you are the painter of that very wonderful picture I saw at the Academy this
afternoon? Allow me to offer you my congratulations upon it. It interested me more deeply than I can say, and
on some future date I shall be grateful if you will let me talk to you upon the subject. The knowledge it
displayed of the country and the period is remarkable in these days. May I ask how it was acquired?"
"My father was a famous Egyptologist," I replied. "All that I know I learned from him. Are you also familiar
with the country?"
"There are few things and fewer countries with which I am not familiar," he replied somewhat conceitedly,
but still watching me and speaking with the same peculiar gravity. "Some day I shall hope to offer you
conclusive evidence on that point. In the meantime, the hour grows late. I thank you, and bid you farewell."
Then, with a bow, he passed on, and a moment later I too had quitted the house and was making my way
homeward, trying to collect my impressions of the evening as I went.
CHAPTER II. 16
CHAPTER III.
To infer that my introduction that evening to the beautiful violinist and her diabolical companion, Monsieur
Pharos, produced no effect upon me, would be as idle as it would be misleading. On leaving Medenham
House I was conscious of a variety of sensations, among which were attraction for the woman, repugnance for
the man, and curiosity as to the history and relationship of both. What was perhaps still more perplexing,
considering the small, but none the less genuine, antagonism that existed between us, by the time I reached
my own abode I had lost my first intense hatred of the man, and was beginning to look forward, with a degree
of interest which a few hours before would have surprised me, to that next meeting which he had prophesied
would so soon come to pass. Lightly as I proposed to myself to treat it, his extraordinary individuality must
have produced a deeper effect upon me than I imagined, for, as in the afternoon, I soon discovered that, try to
divert my thoughts from it how I would, I could not dispel his sinister image from my mind. Every detail of
the evening's entertainment was vividly photographed upon my brain. Without even the formality of shutting
my eyes, I could see the crowded room, the beautiful violinist standing, instrument in hand, beside the piano,
and in the chair at her feet her strange companion, huddled up beneath his heavy rug.
By the time I reached home it was considerably past midnight; but I was not in the least tired, so, exchanging
my dress coat for an old velvet painting jacket, for which I entertained a lasting affection, I lit a cigar and
began to promenade the room. It had been a fancy of mine when I first took the studio, which, you must
understand, was of more than the usual size, to have it decorated in the Egyptian fashion, and, after my
meeting with Pharos, this seemed to have a singular appropriateness. It was as if the quaint images of the
Gods, which decorated the walls, were watching me with almost human interest, and even the gilded face
upon the mummy case, in the alcove at the farther end, wore an expression that I had never noticed on it
before. It might have been saying, "Ah, my nineteenth-century friend, your father stole me from the land of
my birth, and from the resting-place the gods decreed for me; but beware, for retribution is pursuing you, and
is even now close upon your heels."
Cigar in hand, I stopped in my walk and looked at it, thinking as I did so of the country from which it had
hailed, and of the changes that had taken place in the world during the time it had lain in its Theban tomb,
whence it had emerged in the middle of the nineteenth century, with colouring as fresh, and detail as perfect,
as on the day when the hieroglyphics had first left the artist's hand. It was an unusually fine specimen--one of
the most perfect, indeed, of its kind ever brought to England, and, under the influence of the interest it now
inspired in me, I went to an ancient cabinet on the other side of the room, and, opening a small drawer, took
from it a bulky pocket-book, once the property of my father. He it was, as I have already said, who had
discovered the mummy in question, and it was from him, at his death, in company with many other Egyptian
treasures, that I received it.
As I turned the yellow, time-stained pages in search of the information I wanted, the clock of St. Jude's, in the
street behind, struck one, solemnly and deliberately, as though it were conscious of the part it played in the
passage of time. To my surprise the reference was more difficult to find than I had anticipated. Entries there
were in hundreds; records of distances travelled, of measurements taken, evidence as to the supposed
whereabouts of tombs, translations of hieroglyphics, paintings, and inscriptions, memoranda of amounts paid
to Arab sheiks, details of stores and equipments, but for some time no trace of the information I required. At
last, however, it struck me to look in the pocket contained in the cover of the book. My diligence was
immediately rewarded, for there, carefully folded and hidden away, was the small square of parchment upon
which my father had written the name once borne by the dead man, also a complete translation of the record
upon the cartonnage itself. According to the statement here set forth, the coffin contained the mortal remains
of a certain Ptahmes, Chief of the King's Magicians-- an individual who flourished during the reign of
Merenptah (Amenepthes of the Greeks, but better known to the nineteenth century as the Pharaoh of the
Exodus). For all I knew to the contrary, my silent property might have been one of that band of conjurors who
pitted their wits against Moses, and by so doing caused Pharaoh's heart to be hardened so that he would not let
the Children go. Once more I stood looking at the stolid representation of a face before me, wondering what
CHAPTER III. 17
the life's history of the man within could have been, whether his success in life had equalled his ambition, or
was commensurate with his merits, and whether in that age, so long since dead, his heart had ever been
thrilled by thoughts of love.
While wrapped in this brown study, my hearing, which on that particular occasion was for some reason
abnormally acute, caught the sound of a soft footfall on the polished boards at the farther end of the room. I
wheeled sharply round, and a moment later almost fell back against the mummy-case under the influence of
my surprise. (How he had got there I could not tell, for I was certain I had locked the door behind me when I
entered the house.) It is sufficient, however, that, standing before me, scarcely a dozen feet away, breathing
rather heavily as though he had been running, and with what struck me as a frightened look in his eyes, was
no less a person than Monsieur Pharos, the man I had met at the foot of Cleopatra's Needle some weeks
before, at the Academy that afternoon, and at Medenham House only a couple of hours since. Upwards of a
minute elapsed before I could find sufficient voice to question him as to the reason of his presence in my
room.
"My dear Mr. Forrester," he said in a conciliatory tone, "while offering you ten thousand apologies for my
intrusion, I must explain that it is quite by accident I am here. On reaching home this evening, I pined for a
breath of fresh air. Accordingly I went for a stroll, lost my way, eventually found myself in this street, where,
seeing an open door, I took the liberty of entering for the purpose of inquiring which turning I should follow
to reach my hotel. It was not until you turned round that I realized my good fortune in having chanced upon a
friend. It is plain, however, that my presence is not so welcome as I could have desired."
From the way he spoke, I gathered that for some purpose of his own he had taken, or was pretending to take,
offence at my reception of him. Knowing, therefore, that if I desired to see anything further of his beautiful
companion--an idea which I will confess had more than once occurred to me--I must exert myself to conciliate
him, I hastened to apologise for the welcome I had given him, explaining that any momentary hesitation I
might have shown was due more to my surprise than to any intended discourtesy towards himself.
"In that case let us say no more about it," he answered politely, but with the same expression of cunning
malignity on his face to which I have referred elsewhere. "You were quite within your rights, for I should
have remembered that in England an impromptu visit at one in the morning, on the part of an acquaintance of
a few hours' standing, is scarcely likely to be well received."
"If you will carry your memory back a few weeks," I said, as I wheeled a chair up for him, "you will
remember that our acquaintance is not of such a recent date."
"I am rejoiced to hear it," he replied, with a sharp glance at me as he seated himself. "Nevertheless, I must
confess that I fail for the moment to remember where I had the pleasure of meeting you on that occasion. It is
not a complimentary admission, I will confess; but, as you know, Age is proverbially forgetful, and my
memory is far from being what it once was."
Could the man be pretending, or had the incident really escaped his memory? It was just possible, of course,
that on that occasion my face had failed to impress itself upon his recollection; but after the hard things I had
said to him, I had to confess it seemed unlikely. Then the remembrance of the drowning man, his piteous cry
for help, and the other's demoniacal conduct on the steps returned upon me, and I resolved to show no mercy.
"The occasion to which I refer, Monsieur Pharos," I said, standing opposite him and speaking with a sternness
that in the light of all that has transpired since seems almost ludicrous, "was an evening towards the end of
March--a cold, wet night when you stood upon the steps below Cleopatra's Needle, and not only refused help,
but, in a most inhuman fashion, laughed at a drowning man."
I half expected that he would offer a vehement denial, or would at least put forward a plea of forgetfulness. To
CHAPTER III. 18
my surprise, however, he did neither.
"I remember the incident perfectly," he answered, with the most complete composure. "At the same time, I
must say you wrong me when you declare I laughed--on my word, you do! Let us suppose, however, that I did
do so; and where would be the harm? The man desired death; his own action confessed it, otherwise how
came he there? It was proved at the inquest that he had repeatedly declared himself weary of life. He was
starving; he was without hope. Had he lived over that night, death, under any circumstances, would only have
been only a matter of a few days with him. Would you therefore have had me, knowing all this, prolong such
an existence? In the name of that humanity to which you referred just now, I ask you the question. You say I
laughed. Would you have had me weep?"
"A specious argument," I replied; "but I own to you frankly I considered the incident a detestable one."
"There I will meet you most willingly," he continued. "From your point of view it certainly was. From mine
--well, as I said just now, I confess I view it differently. However, I give you my word that in this instance
your pity is undeserved. The man was a contemptible scoundrel in every way. He came of respectable stock,
was reared under the happiest auspices. Had he chosen, he might have been anything in his own rank of life;
but he would not choose. At fifteen he robbed his father's till to indulge in debauchery, and had broken his
parents' hearts before he was five-and-twenty. He married a girl as good as he was bad, and as a result starved
not only himself but his wife and children. Though employment was offered him, he repeatedly refused it, not
from any inability to work, but from sheer love of idleness and distaste of labour. He had not sufficient wit,
courage, or energy to become a criminal; but throughout his life, wherever he went, and upon all with whom
he came in contact, he brought misery and disgrace. Eventually he reached the end of his tether, and was cast
off by every one. The result you know."
The fluency and gusto with which he related these sordid details amazed, while it disconcerted me. I inquired
how, since by his own confession he had been such a short time in London, he had become cognizant of the
man's history. He hesitated before replying.
"Have I not told you once before to-night," he said, "that there are very few things in this world hidden from
my knowledge? I could tell you circumstances in your own life that you flatter yourself are known to no one.
But do not let us talk of such things now. When I entered the room you were reading a paper. You hold it in
your hand at this moment."
"It is a translation, by my father, of the inscription upon the mummy case over yonder," I replied, with an
eagerness to change the subject for which I can scarcely account. "At his death many of his Egyptian treasures
came into my possession, this among them. For some reason or another I had never read the translation until
to-night. I suppose it must have been my meeting with you that put the idea into my head."
"I am interested in such matters, as you know. May I, therefore, be permitted to look at it?"
With a parade of indifference that I could easily see was assumed, Pharos had extended his withered old hand
and taken it from me before I realized what he was doing. Having obtained it, he leaned back in his chair,
staring at the paper as if he could not remove his eyes from it. For some moments not a word passed his lips.
Then, muttering something to himself in a language I did not recognise, he sprang to his feet. The quickness
of the action was so different to his usual enfeebled movements that I did not fail to notice it.
"The mummy!" he cried. "Show me the mummy!"
Before I could answer or comply with his request, he had discovered it for himself, had crossed to it and was
devouring it with his eyes.
CHAPTER III. 19
Upwards of three minutes must have elapsed before he turned to me again. When he did so, I scarcely
recognised the man. So distorted was his countenance that I instinctively recoiled from him in horror.
"Thy father, was it, wretched man," he cried, shaking his skeleton fist at me, while his body trembled like a
leaf under the whirlwind of his passion, "who stole this body from its resting-place? Thy father, was it, who
broke the seals the gods had placed upon the tombs of those who were their servants? If that be so, then may
the punishment decreed against those guilty of the sin of sacrilege be visited on thee and thine for evermore."
Then, turning to the mummy, he continued, as if to himself, "Oh, mighty Egypt! hast thou fallen so far from
thy high estate that even the bodies of thy kings and priests may no longer rest within their tombs, but are
ravished from thee to be gaped at in alien lands. But, by Osiris, a time of punishment is coming. It is decreed,
and none shall stay the sword!"
If I had been surprised at the excitement he had shown on reading the paper, it was nothing to the
astonishment I felt now. For the first time since I had known him, a suspicion of his sanity crossed my mind,
and my first inclination was to draw away from him.
Then the fit, as I deemed it, passed, and his expression changed entirely. He uttered a queer little laugh.
"Once more I must crave your forgiveness, Mr. Forrester," he said, as he sank exhausted into a chair. "Believe
me, I had not the least intention of offending you. Your father was, I know, an ardent Egyptologist, one of that
intrepid band who penetrated to every corner of our sacred land, digging, delving, and bringing to light such
tombs, temples, and monuments as have for centuries lain hidden from the sight of man. For my own part, as
you may have gathered from my tirade just now, my sympathies do not lie in that direction. I am one who
reverences the past, and would fain have others do so."
"At the same time, I scarcely see that that justifies such language towards myself as you used a few moments
since," I replied, with a fair amount of warmth, which I think it will be conceded I had every right to feel.
"It does not justify it in the least," he answered, with ready condescension. "The only way I can hope to do so
is on the plea of the exuberance of my emotion. My dear Mr. Forrester, I beg you will not misunderstand me. I
would not quarrel with you for the wealth of England. Though you are not aware of it, there is a bond between
us that is stronger than chains of steel. You are required for a certain work, and for that reason alone I dare not
offend you or excite your anger, even if I otherwise desired to do so. In this matter I am not my own master."
"A bond between us? A work for which I am required? I am afraid I do not understand you."
"And it is not in my power to enlighten you. Remain assured of this, however: when the time is ripe, you will
be informed."
As he said this the same light that I have described before came into his eyes, causing them to shine as
brightly as two stars. I did not like it. To use a fishing simile, it made me think of the gleam that comes into
the eyes of a hungry pike as he darts towards his helpless prey. Taking this in conjunction with the
extraordinary language he had used towards me, I felt more than ever convinced of his insanity. The thought
was by no means a cheerful one. I had got myself into a nice position. Here I was, alone with a dangerous
lunatic, in the middle of the night, and not a soul within call. How I was to rid myself of him I could not see. I
felt, therefore, that I must humour him until I could hit upon a scheme. I accordingly tried to frame a
conciliatory speech, but before I could do so he had turned to me again.
"Your thoughts are easily read," he began, with a repetition of that queer little laugh which I have described
before; and as he uttered it he leaned a little closer to me till I was sick and faint with the horror of his
presence. "You think me mad, and it will take more than my assurance to make you believe that I am not.
How slight is your knowledge of me! But there, let us put that aside for to-night! There is something of much
CHAPTER III. 20
greater importance to be arranged between us. In the first place, it is necessary, both for your sake-- your
safety, if you like--and for mine, that yonder mummy should pass into my possession."
"Impossible!" I answered. "I could not dream of such a thing! It was one of my poor father's greatest treasures,
and for that reason alone no consideration would induce me to part with it. Besides, despite your assertion that
it is for our mutual safety, I cannot see by what right you ask such a favour of me."
"If you only knew how important it is," he repeated, "that that particular mummy should become my property,
you would not know a single minute's peace until you had seen the last of it. You may not believe me when I
say that I have been searching for it without intermission for nearly fifteen years, and it was only yesterday I
learnt you were the owner of it. And yet it is the truth."
If I had not had sufficient proof already, here was enough to convince me of his madness. Until that evening
he had no notion of my identity, much less of the things I possessed. How, therefore, could he have become
aware that I was the owner of the remains of Ptahmes, the King's Magician? Under the influence of the
momentary irritation caused by his persistence, my intention of humouring him quite slipped my memory, and
I answered sharply that it was no use his bothering me further about the matter, as I had made up my mind and
was not to be moved from it.
He took my refusal with apparent coolness; but the light which again came into his eyes warned me, before it
was too late, not to rely too much upon this. I knew that in his heart he was raging against me, and that at any
moment his passion might take active shape.
"You must excuse my saying so, Monsieur Pharos," I said, rising from my chair and moving towards the
door," but I think it would perhaps be better for both of us to terminate this most unpleasant interview. It is
getting late, and I am tired. With your permission, I will open the door for you."
Seeing that I was determined he should go, and realizing, I suppose, that it was no use his staying longer, he
also rose, and a more evil-looking figure than he presented as he did so Victor Hugo himself could scarcely
have imagined. The light of the quaint old Venetian hanging-lamp in the middle of the room fell full and fair
upon his face, showing me the deep-set gleaming eyes, the wrinkled, nut-cracker face, and the extraordinary
development of shoulder to which I have already directed attention. Old man as he was, a braver man than
myself might have been excused had he declined the task of tackling him, and I had the additional spur of
knowing that if he got the better of me he would show no mercy. For this reason alone I watched his every
movement.
"Come, come, my foolish young friend," he said at length, "in spite of my warning, here we are at a deadlock
again! You really must not take things so seriously. Had I had any idea that you were so determined not to let
me have the thing I want, I would not have dreamed of asking for it. It was for your own good as well as mine
that I did so. Now, since you desire to turn me out, I will not force my presence upon you. But let us part
friends."
As he said this he advanced towards me with extended hand, leaning heavily upon his stick, according to his
custom, and to all intents and purposes as pathetic an example of senile decrepitude as a man could wish to
see. If he were going off like this, I flattered myself, I was escaping from my horrible predicament in an easier
manner than I had expected. However, I was fully determined in my own heart, if I could but once get him on
the other side of the street door, that no earthly consideration should induce me ever to admit him to my
dwelling again. His hand was deathly cold--so cold, in fact, that even in my excitement I could not help
noticing it. I had scarcely done so, however, before a tremor ran through his figure, and with a guttural noise
that scarcely could be described as a cry, he dropped my hand and sprang forward at my throat.
If I live to the age of a hundred, I shall not forget the absolute, the unspeakable, the indescribable terror of that
CHAPTER III. 21
moment. Till then I had never regarded myself in the light of a coward; on the contrary, I had on several
occasions had good reason to congratulate myself upon what is popularly termed my "strength of nerve."
Now, however, it was all different. Possibly the feeling of repulsion, I might almost say of fear, I had hitherto
entertained for him had something to do with it. It may have been the mesmeric power, which I afterwards
had good reason to know he possessed, that did it. At any rate, from the moment he pounced upon me I found
myself incapable of resistance. It was as if all my will power were being slowly extracted from me by the
contact of those skeleton fingers which, when they had once touched my flesh, seemed to lose their icy
coldness, and to burn like bars of red-hot iron. In a dim and misty fashion, somewhat as one sees people
across a street in a fog, I was conscious of the devilish ferocity of the face that was looking into mine. Then a
strange feeling of numbness took possession of me, an entire lack of interest in everything, even in life itself.
Gradually and easily I sank into the chair behind me, the room swam before my eyes, an intense craving for
sleep overcame me, and little by little, still without any attempt at resistance, my head fell back and I lost
consciousness.
CHAPTER III. 22
CHAPTER IV
WHEN I came to myself again it was already morning. In the small square behind the studio the birds were
discussing the prospects of breakfast, though as yet that earliest of all birds, the milkman, had not begun to
make his presence known in the streets. Of all the hours of the day there is not one, to my thinking, so lonely
and so full of dreariness as that which immediately precedes and ushers in the dawn; while, of all the
experiences of our human life, there is, perhaps, not one more unpleasant than to awake from sleep at such an
hour to find that one has passed the entire night in one's clothes and seated in a most uncomfortable armchair.
That was my lot in this particular instance. On opening my eyes, I looked around me with a puzzled air. For
the life of me I could not understand why I was not in my bed. It was the first time I had ever gone to sleep in
my chair, and the idea disquieted me strangely. I studied the room, but, to all intents and purposes, everything
there was just the same as when I had closed my eyes. I only was changed. My brain was as heavy as lead,
and, though I did my best to recall the events of the previous evening, I found that, while I could recollect the
"at home" at Medenham House, and my return to my studio afterwards, I could remember nothing that
followed later. I was still pursuing this train of thought when I became aware of a loud knocking at the street
door. I immediately hastened to it and drew the bolts. My surprise may be imagined on discovering an
inspector of police standing upon the threshold, with a constable behind him.
"Mr. Forrester, I believe?" he began; and as soon as I had nodded an affirmative, continued, "You must excuse
my disturbing you, sir, at this early hour, but the reason is imperative. I should be glad if you would permit me
the honour of five minutes' conversation with you alone."
"With pleasure," I answered, and immediately invited him to enter.
Having shut the door behind him, I led the way to the studio, where I signed him to a chair, taking up a
position myself on the hearthrug before him. The constable remained in the passage outside.
"It is, as you say, rather an early hour for a call," I remarked, making a mental note as I spoke of the man's
character as I read it in his large, honest eyes, well-shaped nose, and square, determined-looking chin, "What
can I do for you?"
"I believe you are in a position to furnish me with some important information," he replied. "A diabolical
murder was committed at the old curiosity shop at the corner of the next street, either late last night or during
the early hours of this morning, most probably between midnight and one o'clock. It is altogether a most
remarkable affair, and, from the evidence we have before us, though no cries were heard, the struggle must
have been a desperate one. From the fact that the front door was still locked and bolted when we forced our
way in, it is plain that the murderer must have effected his escape by the back. Indeed, a man was seen
entering the alley behind the house between one and two o'clock, though this circumstance gave rise to no
suspicion at the time. The witness who saw him reports that he came along on this side of the street, in the
shadow, and, though he is not at all certain on this point, believes that he entered one of the houses
hereabouts. That on your right is empty, and the doors and windows are securely fastened. He could not,
therefore, have gone in there. That on the left is a boarding-house. I have called upon the landlady, who
asserts most positively that her front door was not opened to any one after ten o'clock last night. She informs
me, however, that a light was burning in your studio all night, and I see for myself that you have not been to
bed. May I ask, therefore, if you saw anything of such a man, or whether you can furnish me with such
particulars as will be likely to help us in our search for him?"
Like lightning, while he was talking, the memory of all that had happened that morning, and the visit Pharos
had paid me, flashed into my mind. As it did so, I glanced involuntarily towards that part of the room where
the mummy had hitherto stood. To my amazement--I might almost say to my consternation--it was no longer
there. What had become of it? Could Pharos, after disposing of me as he had done, have stolen it and
transported it away? It seemed impossible, and yet I had the best of evidence before me that it was no longer
CHAPTER IV 23
there. And then another question; Had Pharos had any connection with the murder? The time at which it was
supposed to have been committed, between midnight and one o'clock, was precisely that at which he had
made his appearance before me. And yet what reason had I, but my own terrible suspicions, to lead me to the
conclusion that he was the author of this fiendish bit of work? I saw, however, that my continued silence was
impressing my companion unfavourably.
"Come, sir," he said, this time a little more sharply than before; "I must remind you that my time is valuable.
Am I to understand that you are in a position to help me, or not?"
God knows, if I had been my own master I should have loosed my tongue instantly and revealed all I knew. I
should have told him under what terrible circumstances I had met Pharos on the Embankment that wet night
towards the end of March, and have commented on his inhuman conduct on that occasion. I should have
informed him of the appearance he had made in my studio early this morning, not only with a frightened look
in his eyes, but breathing heavily as if he had been running, though such a thing would have seemed an
impossibility in a man of his years. Then I should have gone on to tell how he had attempted to induce me to
part with something upon which I placed considerable value, and, being disappointed, had hypnotised me and
made off with the article in question. All this, as I say, I should have narrated had I been my own master. But
God knows I was not. An irresistible force was at work within me, compelling me, even against my will, to
screen him, and to tell the first deliberate lie to which I had ever given utterance in my life.
It was a poor excuse to offer, and I am aware that a world so censorious as our own will in all probability not
believe this statement, but upon my hopes of forgiveness at the Last Great Day, at that dread moment when
the sins of all men shall be judged and punishment awarded, I declare it to be true in every single particular;
and, what is more, I further say that even if my life depended on it I could not have done otherwise.
Though it has taken some time to place these thoughts on paper, the interval that elapsed between the
inspector's last question and my answer, which seemed to me so halting and suspicious, to the effect that I had
neither seen nor heard anything of the man he wanted, was scarcely more than a few seconds.
Having received my assurance, the officer apologised for troubling me, and withdrew, and I was left alone
with my thoughts. Deep down in my heart there was the desire to hasten after him and to tell him that not only
had I lied to him, but that it was possible for me to make amends by putting him on the track of the man who,
I felt morally certain, was the criminal. The wish, however, was scarcely born before it was dragged down and
stifled by that same irresistible force I have described a few lines since. It seemed to me I was bound hand and
foot, powerless to help myself, and incapable of aught save to carry out the will of the remorseless being into
whose power I had fallen so completely. But had I really so fallen? Could it be possible that such power was
permitted to a human being? No, no--a thousand times no! If he had that influence he must be an agent of the
Evil One, whose mission it was to draw to perdition the souls of helpless men. Filled with shame, I sank into a
chair and covered my face with my hands, as if by so doing I could shut out the horrible thoughts that filled
my brain. Was it true, I asked myself, in the bitterest self-humiliation, that I, who had always regarded a liar
as the most despicable of men, had sunk so low as to become one myself? God help me! God pity me! Of all
the bitter hours my life has known, I think that moment was the worst.
For some time after the inspector had taken his departure I sat, as I have said, my face covered with my hands,
trying to think coherently. Twenty-four hours before I had been one of the happiest men in England. Nothing
had troubled me. I had lived for my art and in my art, and I believe I can confidently say that I had not an
enemy in the world. Now, in a single hour, my whole life was changed. I had been drawn into the toils of a
fiend in human shape, and I was paying the awful penalty.
Hour after hour went by. My servant arrived, and presently brought in my breakfast, but I put it aside; I had
too much upon my mind to eat. It was in vain I tried to force myself. My food stuck in my throat and defied
me. All the time I was oppressed by the diabolical picture of that murder. The shop in which it had occurred
CHAPTER IV 24
was one with which I was familiar. In my mind's eye I saw the whole scene as clearly as if I had been present
at the time. I saw the shop, filled to overflowing with bric-&-brac, the light of the single gas lamp reflected in
hundreds of varieties of brass and pottery work. At a desk in the corner sat the dealer himself, and before him,
holding him in earnest conversation, the extraordinary figure of Pharos the Assassin. How he came to be there
at such an hour I could not tell, but from what I knew of him I was convinced it was with no good purpose. I
could imagine how off his guard and totally unprepared for attack the other would be; and, even if he had
entertained any suspicions, it is extremely doubtful whether he would have credited this deformed atom with
the possession, either of such malignity or of such giant strength. Then that same cruel light that had exercised
such an influence upon me began to glisten in the murderer's eyes. Little by little he moved his right hand
behind him, until it touched an Oriental dagger lying on a table beside which he stood. Then, with that cat-like
spring which I had good reason to remember, he leapt upon his opponent and seized him by the throat, driving
the blade deep in below the shoulder. His victim, paralysed with surprise, at first offered no resistance. Then,
with the instinct of self-preservation, he began to struggle with his devilish opponent, only to discover the
strength that seemingly attenuated form possessed. Little by little his power departed from him, and at last,
with a crash, he fell back upon the floor. I pictured Pharos stopping over him, to see if he were dead,
chuckling with delight at the success he had achieved. Having convinced himself on this head, he abstracted a
key from the dead man's pocket, and approached a safe built into the wall. The handle turned, and the door
swung open. A moment later he had taken a ring set with a scarabaeus from a drawer and dropped it into his
pocket. After that he paused while he considered in which direction it would be safest for him to make his
escape. A policeman's step sounded on the pavement outside, and as he heard it he looked up, and his thin lips
drew back, showing the wolfish teeth behind. His horrible cunning pointed out to him the danger he would
incur in leaving by the front. Accordingly he made his way through the sitting-room behind the shop, and
passed out by the gate in the yard beyond. A few seconds later he was in my presence, but whether by
accident or design was more than I could say.
So vivid was the picture I had conjured up that I could not help believing it must be something more than
mere conjecture on my part. If so, what course should I pursue? I had been robbed. I had given a murderer
shelter at the very moment when he stood most in need of it, and when the law was close upon his heels I had
pledged my word for his innocence and perjured myself to ensure his salvation. His presence had been
repulsive to me ever since I had first set eyes on him. I hated the man as I had hitherto deemed it impossible I
could hate any one. Yet, despite all this, by some power--how real I cannot expect any one to believe--he was
compelling me to shield him and behave towards him as if he had been my brother, or at least my dearest
friend. I can feel the shame of that moment even now, the agonizing knowledge of the deep gulf that separated
me from the man I was yesterday, or even an hour before.
I rose from the table, leaving my breakfast untouched, and stood at the window looking out upon the dismal
square beyond. The sunshine of the earlier morning had given place to a cloudy sky, and, as I watched, a
heavy shower began to fall. It was as if Nature were weeping tears of shame to see a Child of Man brought so
low. I went to the place where, until a few hours before, the mummy had stood--that wretched mummy which
had been the cause of all the trouble. As I had good reason to know, it weighed a considerable amount, more,
indeed, than I should have imagined an old man like Pharos could have lifted, much less carried. I examined
the floor to see if the case had been dragged over it, but highly polished as the boards were, I could detect no
sign of such a thing. The wainscoting of the hall next received my attention, but with a similar result. And it
was at this juncture that another curious point in the evening's story struck me. When I had admitted the
inspector of police, I had unlocked and unchained the door. I was also the sole occupant of the building. How,
therefore, had Pharos conveyed his burden outside, and locked, chained, and bolted the door behind him?
Under the influence of this new discovery I returned with all speed to the studio. Perhaps he had not gone out
by the front door at all, but had made his escape by the windows at the back. These I carefully examined, only
to find them safely bolted as usual. The riddle was beyond me. I had to confess myself beaten. Was it possible
I could have dreamed the whole thing? Had I fallen asleep in my chair and imagined a meeting with Pharos
which had really never taken place? Oh, if only it could be true, what a difference it would make in my
happiness! And yet, staring me in the face, was the damning evidence that the mummy was gone. When I rose
CHAPTER IV 25
from my chair my mind was made up. I would seek Pharos out, accuse him not only of the theft, but of the
murder, and make him understand, with all the earnestness of which I was master, that justice should be done,
and that I would no longer shield him from the consequences of his villainy. It was only then that I
remembered that I had no knowledge of the man's whereabouts. I considered for a moment how I could best
overcome this difficulty. Lady Medenham was, of course, the one person of all others to help me. Since she
had invited the man to her house, it was almost certain that she could furnish me with his address. I would go
to her without further waste of time. Accordingly I made the necessary changes in my toilet and left the
studio. The rain had ceased, and the streets were once more full of sunshine. It was a pleasant morning for
walking, but so urgent did my business seem that I felt I could not even spare the time for exercise. Hailing a
hansom, I bade the man drive me with all possible speed to Eaton Square. To my delight Lady Medenham
was at home, and I was shown forthwith to her boudoir. A few moments elapsed before she joined me there,
and then her first remark was one of astonishment.
