Introduction 3
3
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 318: Plant Cell Culture Protocols, Second Edition
Edited by: V. M. Loyola-Vargas and F. Vázquez-Flota © Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
1
An Introduction to Plant Cell Culture
Back to the Future
Victor M. Loyola-Vargas and Felipe Vázquez-Flota
Summary
Plant cell, tissue, and organ culture is a set of techniques designed for the growth and multiplication
of cells and tissues using nutrient solutions in an aseptic and controlled environment.
This technology explores conditions that promote cell division and genetic
reprogramming in in vitro conditions. Mainly developed in the early 1960s, plant tissue culture
has turned into a standard procedure for modern biotechnology and today one can recognize
five major areas where in vitro cell cultures are currently applied: large-scale propagation of
elite materials, generation of genetic modified fertile individuals, as a model system for fundamental
plant cell physiology aspects, preservation of endangered species, and metabolic engineering
of fine chemicals. This chapter reviews the recent advances in such areas.
Key Words: Aseptic culture; genetic modified organisms; large-scale propagation; metabolic
engineering; plant cell culture; techniques.
1. Introduction
Multicellular organisms vary greatly in their complexity, developmental
patterns, and reproductive strategies. Nevertheless, and despite such differences,
all of them share the common feature of having a single-celled phase at
the very beginning of their life cycles. This single cell will become a new individual
cell after several rounds of division, resulting in the development of
structures made of specialized cells. For this reason, the unicellular stage is
recognized as totipotent; this attribute will be present only in the cells produced
during the initial rounds of division. Once the early stages of cell division
have been completed, and different sets of cells have been committed to4 Loyola-Vargas and Vázques-Flota
form specialized structures, totipotency is almost lost. The knowledge of the
events that govern the transformation of that single cell into a complete and
functional individual lies at the core of the understanding of life itself.
Biologists have known for many years that somatic plant cells are more
amenable to be reprogrammed than cells isolated from animal tissues. If exposed
to the proper conditions, even the most specialized plant cells can be
induced to express genes that otherwise would only be expressed at the onset
of the process of morphogenesis. As a result of such a change in the pattern of
gene expression, new cell types, different from the original one, may be formed.
Plant cell and tissue culture technology explores conditions that promote cell
division and genetic re-programming in in vitro conditions.
Plant tissue culture refers to the set of techniques designed for the growth
and multiplication of cells, tissues, and organs using nutrient solutions in an
aseptic and controlled environment (see Chapters 2, 4–7 and Fig. 1). Throughout
the years, since the early 1960s to the mid-1980s (see Chapter 2), tissue
culture has turned into a basic asset to modern biotechnology, and facilities for
in vitro cell cultures are found today in practically each plant biology laboratory,
serving different purposes, from the fundamental biochemical aspects to
the massive propagation of selected individuals. Browsing through the most
influential journals on plant sciences, one can recognize five major areas where
in vitro cell cultures are being currently applied: large-scale propagation of
elite materials, generation of genetic modified fertile individuals, as a model
system for fundamental plant cell physiology aspects, preservation of endangered
species, and metabolic engineering of fine chemicals.
2. Large-Scale Propagation of Elite Materials
The commercial technology for plant massive multiplication is primarily
based on micropropagation (see Chapters 11, 14, 16). Micropropagation protocols
are aimed at the rapid multiplication of plantlets true-to-type to the original
material. Meristematic tissues, located either on terminal or axillary buds,
are induced to proliferate in response to hormonal treatments. Hypocotyls are
also frequently used as the original explant, because bud formation can be easily
induced in them as compared with more mature tissues. Culture conditions,
mainly nitrogen source, light regime, and temperature, can play critical roles in
favoring bud development into vitroplants. Although the propagation protocols
for a number of plant species were developed in the 1960s, transition of in
vitro to ex vitro conditions even now frequently represents a bottleneck step.
Therefore, successful commercial propagation protocols also require procedures
for the establishment of plants to field conditions in addition to the efficient
multiplication of plantlets (see Chapter 12). The massive production ofIntroduction 5
embryos, and their later development into entire plants, can also provide a
methodology for the propagation of selected materials (see Chapter 8).
3. Generation of Genetic Modified Fertile Individuals
The events required to genetically transform an organism occur at the cellular
level. Plant transformation protocols require of both a reliable DNA delivery
methodology, as well as the efficient regeneration of fertile individuals
from the modified cells. Techniques to introduce foreign genes into plant genomes
include the Agrobacterium system and the bombardment of DNAcovered
microprojectiles (see Chapters 22–24, 26). Selective markers, such as
Fig. 1. (A) Callus from Catharanthus roseus. (B) Suspension culture from
Coryphanta spp. (C) Tumors from C. roseus. (D) Hairy roots from C. roseus. (E)
Regeneration of plantlets from C. roseus callus. (F) Protoplasts from Coffea arabica.
(G) Micropropagation of Agave tequilana. (H) Somatic embryogenesis of Coffea
canephora. (I) Root culture from Psacalium decompositum. A, C, D, E, F, H, and I
from the authors’ laboratories. B from the laboratory of Dr. Lourdes Miranda. G from
the laboratory of Dr. Manuel Robert. All of them are from Centro de Investigación
Cientifica de Yucatán.6 Loyola-Vargas and Vázques-Flota
antibiotic resistance, chromophores, or fluorochromes, are incorporated to distinguish
the transformed tissues from those untransformed. Genetically modified
plants will rise from individual cells and, because DNA insertion is a
random process, an efficient regeneration procedure will increase the probability
of recovering a transgenic plant. For this reason, the use of tissues with a
high-morphogenetic or embryogenic potential is recommended (see Chapters
9 and 10). Protoplasts can also be used (see Chapters 17–21); however, they
may require a considerable amount of labor before regenerating a new plant,
although with better odds of obtaining actual transformants.
4. In Vitro Cultures as a Model for the Study of Plant Cell Physiology
In vitro cultures represent an advantageous system for the study of different
processes in plant cell physiology. Conditions can be strictly controlled, allowing
monitoring of the effects of a single factor on a given process. One of the
best examples of the use of cell cultures with such purposes may be the triggering
of the defense mechanisms in response to elicitation. A number of genes
involved in different aspects of such response, including those in perception of
the stimulus, as well as in the signaling pathway, have been isolated and characterized
in cell cultures from different species. Elicitation of secondary
metabolism in cell cultures has also led to the identification of the biosynthetic
enzymes involved in the process, in addition to the isolation of both structural
and regulatory genes (see Chapter 30). Cell mechanisms for resistance to metals
(see Chapter 25), salinity or drought among others, can be analyzed without
having the interference of tissue organization. Furthermore, in vitro cultures
submitted to morphogenetic conditions provide an optimum system for the
study of the biochemical and molecular aspects associated with plant differentiation
(see Chapter 10).
5. Preservation of Endangered Species and Phytogenetic Resources
Every year, an important number of plant species disappear, partly as a result
of the loss of natural areas. Plants with a complex reproductive biology are
particularly endangered given the reduction of their natural habitats, along with
the small sizes of their populations and their prolonged life cycle. Furthermore,
endangered, asexually propagated plants have to deal with the reduction of their
genetic variability, which increases their susceptibility to an abrupt environmental
change or to the introduction of new elements into their ecosystem. In
vitro culture represents an alternative to preserve and regenerate endangered
species’ populations through micropropagation techniques (see Chapter 15).
New sources of genetic variation can be generated that arise from somaclonal
variation, which is inherent to callus or cell suspension cultures (see Chapter 6).Introduction 7
It is not only tropical and exotic species that are endangered. The use of
improved plant varieties have resulted in the diminished utilization of traditional
varieties of several crops, such as maize, potato, and tomato. Quite often,
these traditional varieties, which may have been bred for hundreds of years,
and are still cultivated by farmers of small communities, are adapted to very
specific environments or conditions isolated by distance or geographical conditions.
Besides their cultural value, they may represent an unexplored source
for resistance genes to pathogens, insects, and drought. In vitro culture provides
the technology for the preservation of such phytogenetic resources, which
may not be adapted to flourish in nurseries or under greenhouse conditions. In
vitro cultures may also be used to preserve extended collections of germoplasm
in reduced areas under strictly controlled environments. This approach is particularly
valuable in the case of plants, which are vegetatively propagated. Terminal
or axillary buds cultured in vitro may also be preserved by cryogenic
techniques, thereby minimizing the excessive tissue manipulation required (see
Chapter 7). The preservation of valuable tropical genetic resources, deposited
in germoplasm banks and maintained by means of in vitro techniques, represents
a growing trend in tissue culture applications.
6. Metabolic Engineering of Fine Chemicals
Once the technology for culturing plant cells in a manner similar to fungal
and bacterial cells was available, the production of fine chemicals (natural
products or secondary metabolites) was among the first applications to be pursued.
However, differing from fungi and bacteria, the pattern of natural products
yielded by plant cells in culture frequently showed variations from those
of organized tissues. Despite many years and numerous attempts by several
laboratories around the world, in vitro cell cultures have not turned out to be
efficient factories of natural products. Nevertheless, cell cultures proved to be
an invaluable source for enzymes and genes involved in the synthesis of these
metabolites (see Chapter 30), as well as for establishing the relationship between
cell differentiation and secondary metabolism. Early approaches to promote
the production of secondary metabolites included the induction of cell
lines from highly productive tissues or individuals, the systematic screening of
numerous cell lines for strains with a high-biosynthetic potential, and the formulation
of culture media composition. Because very little was known about
the regulation of secondary metabolism, such approaches were based on following
a series of trial and error assays, rather than on a solid biochemical
rationalization. The better understanding of the tight regulation governing secondary
metabolism pathways as well as its close relationship with branches of
the primary metabolism, can now be applied through metabolic engineering8 Loyola-Vargas and Vázques-Flota
strategies in order to promote the accumulation of valuable natural products
through use of in vitro cultures. Metabolic engineering is aimed to improve
cell processes, by means of recombinant DNA technology, for commercial
purposes. Genes coding for enzymes involved in limiting steps in a pathway
may be over-expressed in cell cultures favoring carbon flux through it (see
Chapters 27–30). Alternatively, new enzymatic activities can be introduced,
resulting in the formation of new compounds. Recently, the identification of
regulatory genes, controlling the coordinated activation of a set of enzymes
involved in secondary metabolism, has created new possibilities for the genetic
manipulation of the whole pathway, by means of a single gene.
7. Future Perspectives
Plant cell cultures have turned into an invaluable tool to plant scientists and
today in vitro culture techniques are standard procedures in most laboratories.
However, the usefulness of this technology goes beyond academic laboratories.
Massive propagation of plants represents an economically rewarding enterprise
as a number of companies report significant profits every year. Plant
biotechnology has experienced new and exciting advances thanks to the development
of genomics, proteomics, and more recently, metabolomics. These approaches
will, without doubt, accelerate the discovery, isolation, and
characterization of genes, thus conferring new agronomic traits to crops. However,
as mentioned in Chapters 22–26, successful genetic engineering programs
for the development of new plant varieties, require the stable insertion of those
genes into the plant genome and their stable transmission to the offspring. Nevertheless,
in some cases, regeneration of whole plants from transgenic cells or
tissues may not be necessary. The production of fine chemicals in genetically
modified cells cultured in large volumes may prove advantageous over production
in field grown plants that would occupy considerable extensions of
land, which could, in turn, be used for agriculture. Therefore, technologies for
cell culture in such volume conditions should be established. The requirements
for the development of such methodologies seem enough to keep cell culture
scientists busy for a number of years.Plant Tissue Culture 9
9
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 318: Plant Cell Culture Protocols, Second Edition
Edited by: V. M. Loyola-Vargas and F. Vázquez-Flota © Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
2
History of Plant Tissue Culture
Trevor A. Thorpe
Summary
Plant tissue culture, or the aseptic culture of cells, tissues, organs, and their components
under defined physical and chemical conditions in vitro, is an important tool in both basic and
applied studies as well as in commercial application. It owes its origin to the ideas of the German
scientist, Haberlandt, at the beginning of the 20th century. The early studies led to root
cultures, embryo cultures, and the first true callus/tissue cultures. The period between the 1940s
and the 1960s was marked by the development of new techniques and the improvement of
those already in use. It was the availability of these techniques that led to the application of
tissue culture to five broad areas, namely, cell behavior (including cytology, nutrition, metabolism,
morphogenesis, embryogenesis, and pathology), plant modification and improvement,
pathogen-free plants and germplasm storage, clonal propagation, and product (mainly secondary
metabolite) formation, starting in the mid-1960s. The 1990s saw continued expansion in
the application of the in vitro technologies to an increasing number of plant species. Cell cultures
have remained an important tool in the study of basic areas of plant biology and biochemistry
and have assumed major significance in studies in molecular biology and agricultural
biotechnology. The historical development of these in vitro technologies and their applications
are the focus of this chapter.
Key Words: Cell behavior; cell suspensions; clonal propagation; organogenesis; plantlet
regeneration; plant transformation; protoplasts; somatic embryogenesis; vector-dependent/independent
gene transfer.
1. Introduction
Plant tissue culture, also referred to as cell, in vitro, axenic, or sterile culture,
is an important tool in both basic and applied studies, as well as in commercial
application (1). Plant tissue culture is the aseptic culture of cells,
tissues, organs and their components under defined physical and chemical conditions
in vitro. The theoretical basis for plant tissue culture was proposed by10 Thorpe
Gottlieb Haberlandt in his address to the German Academy of Science in 1902
on his experiments on the culture of single cells (2). He opined that, to my
knowledge, no systematically organized attempts to culture isolated vegetative
cells from higher plants have been made. Yet the results of such culture experiments
should give some interesting insight to the properties and potentialities
that the cell, as an elementary organism, possesses. Moreover, it would provide
information about the interrelationships and complementary influences to
which cells within a multicellular whole organism are exposed (from the English
translation, [3]). He experimented with isolated photosynthetic leaf cells and
other functionally differented cells and was unsuccessful, but nevertheless he
predicted that one could successfully cultivate artificial embryos from vegetative
cells. He, thus, clearly established the concept of totipotency, and further
indicated that the technique of cultivating isolated plant cells in nutrient solution
permits the investigation of important problems from a new experimental
approach. On the basis of that 1902 address and his pioneering experimentation
before and later, Haberlandt is justifiably recognized as the father of plant
tissue culture. Other studies led to the culture of isolated root tips (4,5). This
approach of using explants with meristematic cells produced the successful
and indefinite culture of tomato root tips (6). Further work allowed for root
culture on a completely defined medium. Such root cultures were used initially
for viral studies and later as a major tool for physiological studies (7). Success
was also achieved with bud cultures (8,9).
Embryo culture also had its beginning early in the first decade of the last
century with barley embryos (10). This was followed by the successful rescue
of embryos from nonviable seeds of a cross between Linum perenne?Linum
austriacum (11), and for full embryo development in some early-ripening species
of fruit trees (12); thus providing one of the earliest applications of in vitro
culture. The phenomenon of precocious germination was also encountered (13).
The first true plant tissue cultures were obtained by Gautheret (14,15) from
cambial tissue of Acer pseudoplatanus. He also obtained success with similar
explants of Ulmus campestre, Robinia pseudoacacia, and Salix capraea using
agar-solidified medium of Knop’s solution, glucose and cysteine hydrochloride.
Later, the availability of indole acetic acid and the addition of B vitamins
allowed for the more or less simultaneous demonstrations with carrot root tissues
(16,17), and with tumor tissue of a Nicotiana glauca ? Nicotiana
langsdorffii hybrid (18), which did not require auxin, that tissues could be continuously
grown in culture; and even made to differentiate roots and shoots
(19,20). However, all of the initial explants used by these pioneers included
meristematic tissue. Nevertheless, these findings set the stage for the dramatic
increase in the use of in vitro cultures in the subsequent decades. Greater detail
on the early pioneering events in plant tissue culture can be found in WhitePlant Tissue Culture 11
(21), Bhojwani and Razdan (22), and Gautheret (23). This current article is
based on an earlier review by the author (24) (used with permission from
Elsevier).
2. The Development and Improvement of Techniques
The 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s proved an exciting time for the development
of new techniques and the improvement of those already available. The application
of coconut water (often incorrectly referred to as coconut milk) allowed
for the culture of young embryos (25) and other recalcitrant tissues, including
monocots. Callus cultures of numerous species, including a variety of woody
and herbaceous dicots and gymnosperms, as well as crown gall tissues, were
established as well (23). It was recognized at this time that cells in culture
underwent a variety of changes, including loss of sensitivity to applied auxin
or habituation (26,27), as well as variability of meristems formed from callus
(27,28). Nevertheless, it was during this period that most of the in vitro techniques
used today were largely developed.
Studies by Skoog et al. (29) showed that the addition of adenine and high
levels of phosphate allowed nonmeristematic pith tissues to be cultured and to
produce shoots and roots, but only in the presence of vascular tissue. Further
studies using nucleic acids led to the discovery of the first cytokinin (kinetin),
as the breakdown product of herring sperm DNA (30). The availability of kinetin
further increased the number of species that could be cultured indefinitely,
but perhaps most importantly, led to the recognition that the exogenous balance
of auxin and kinetin in the medium influenced the morphogenic fate of
tobacco callus (31). A relative high level of auxin to kinetin-favored rooting,
the reverse led to shoot formation and intermediate levels to the proliferation
of callus or wound parenchyma tissue. This morphogenic model has been
shown to operate in numerous species (32). Native cytokinins were subsequently
discovered in several tissues, including coconut water (33). The formation
of bipolar somatic embryos (carrot) was first reported independently
by Reinert (34,35) and Steward (36) in addition to the formation of unipolar
shoot buds and roots.
The culture of single cells (and small cell clumps) was achieved by shaking
callus cultures of Tagetes erecta and tobacco, and subsequently placing them
on filter paper resting on well-established callus, giving rise to the so-called
nurse culture (37,38). Later, single cells could be grown in medium in which
tissues had already been grown (i.e., conditioned medium) (39). As well, single
cells incorporated in a 1-mm layer of solidified medium formed some cell colonies
(40). This technique is widely used for cloning cells and in protoplast
culture (22). Finally, in 1959, success was achieved in the culture of mechanically
isolated mature differentiated mesophyll cells of Macleaya cordata (41),12 Thorpe
and later in the induction of somatic embryos from the callus (42). The first
large-scale culture of plant cells was obtained from cell suspensions of Ginkgo,
holly, Lolium and rose in simple sparged 20-L carboys (43). The utilization of
coconut water as an additive to fresh medium, instead of using conditioned
medium, finally led to realization of Haberlandt’s dream of producing a whole
plant (tobacco) from a single cell by Vasil and Hildebrandt (44), thus demonstrating
the totipotency of plant cells.
The earliest nutrient media used for growing plant tissues in vitro were
based on the nutrient formulations for whole plants, for which they were many
(21); but Knop’s solution and that of Uspenski and Uspenskia were used the
most, and provided less than 200 mg/L of total salts. Based on studies with
carrot and Virginia creeper tissues, the concentration of salts was increased
twofold (45), and was further increased ca. 4 g/L, based on work with Jerusalem
artichoke (46). However, these changes did not provide optimum growth
for tissues, and complex addenda, such as yeast extract, protein hydrolysates,
and coconut water, were frequently required. In a different approach, based
on an examination of the ash of tobacco callus, Murashige and Skoog (MS)
(47) developed a new medium. The concentration of some salts was 25 times
that of Knop’s solution. In particular, the levels of NO3
– and NH4
+ were very
high and the arrays of micronutrients were increased. MS formulation allowed
for a further increase in the number of plant species that could be cultured,
many of them using only a defined medium consisting of macro- and micronutrients,
a carbon source, reduced N, B vitamins, and growth regulators (48).
The MS salt formulation is now the most widely used nutrient medium in
plant tissue culture.
Plantlets were successfully produced by culturing shoot tips with a couple
of primordia of Lupinus and Tropaeolum (9), but the importance of this finding
was not recognized until later when this approach to obtain virus-free orchids,
its potential for clonal propagation was realized (49). The potential was rapidly
exploited, particularly with ornamentals (50). Early studies had shown that
cultured root tips were free of viruses (51). It was later observed that the virus
titer in the shoot meristem was very low (52). This was confirmed when virusfree
Dahlia plants were obtained from infected plants by culturing their shoot
tips (53). Virus elimination was possible because vascular tissues, within which
the viruses move, do not extend into the root or shoot apex. The method was
further refined (54), and now routinely used.
Techniques for in vitro culture of floral and seed parts were developed during
this period. The first attempts at ovary culture yielded limited growth of the
ovaries accompanied by rooting of pedicels in several species (56). Compared
to studies with embryos, successful ovule culture is very limited. Studies with
both ovaries and ovules have been geared mainly to an understanding of facPlant Tissue Culture 13
tors regulating embryo and fruit development (56). The first continuously
growing tissue cultures from an endosperm were from immature maize (57).
Plantlet regeneration via organogenesis was later achieved in Exocarpus
cupressiformis (58).
In vitro pollination and fertilization was pioneered using Papaver somniferum
(59). The approach involves culturing excised ovules and pollen grains together
in the same medium and has been used to produce interspecific and intergeneric
hybrids (60). Earlier, cell colonies were obtained from Ginkgo pollen grains in
culture (61), and haploid callus was obtained from whole anthers of Tradescantia
reflexa (62). However, it was the finding of Guha and Maheshwari (63,64)
that haploid plants could be obtained from cultured anthers of Datura innoxia
that opened the new area of androgenesis. Haploid plants of tobacco were also
obtained (65), thus confirming the totipotency of pollen grains.
Plant protoplasts or cells without cell walls were first mechanically isolated
from plasmolysed tissues well over 100 yr ago, and the first fusion was
achieved in 1909 (23). Nevertheless, this remained an unexplored technology
until the use of a fungal cellulase by Cocking (66) ushered in a new era. The
commercial availability of cell wall degrading enzymes led to their wide use
and the development of protoplast technology in the 1970s. The first demonstration
of the totipotency of protoplasts was by Takebe et al. (67), who obtained
tobacco plants from mesophyll protoplasts. This was followed by the
regeneration of the first interspecific hybrid plants (N. glauca ? N.
langsdorffii) (68).
Braun (69) showed that in sunflower Agrobacterium tumefaciens could induce
tumors, not only at the inoculated sites, but at distant points. These secondary
tumors were free of bacteria and their cells could be cultured without auxin (70).
Further experiments showed that crown gall tissues, free of bacteria, contained a
tumor-inducing principle (TIP), which was probably a macromolecule (71). The
nature of the TIP was worked out in the 1970s (72), but Braun’s work served as
the foundation for Agrobacterium-based transformation. It should also be noted
that the finding by Ledoux (73) that plant cells could take up and integrate DNA
remained controversial for more than a decade.
3. The Recent Past
Based on the availability of the various in vitro techniques discussed in Subheading
2., it is not surprising that, starting in the mid-1960s, there was a
dramatic increase in their application to various problems in basic biology, agriculture,
horticulture, and forestry through the 1970s and 1980s. These applications
can be divided conveniently into five broad areas, namely: (1) cell
behavior, (2) plant modification and improvement, (3) pathogen-free plants
and germplasm storage, (4) clonal propagation, and (5) product formation (1).14 Thorpe
Detailed information on the approaches used can be gleaned from Bhojwani
and Razdan (22), Vasil (74), and Vasil and Thorpe (75), among several sources.
3.1. Cell Behavior
Included under this heading are studies dealing with cytology, nutrition, primary,
and secondary metabolism, as well as morphogenesis and pathology of
cultured tissues (1). Studies on the structure and physiology of quiescent cells
in explants, changes in cell structure associated with the induction of division
in these explants and the characteristics of developing callus, and cultured cells
and protoplasts have been carried out using light and electron microscopy (76–
79). Nuclear cytology studies have shown that endoreduplication, endomitosis,
and nuclear fragmentation are common features of culture cells (80,81).
Nutrition was the earliest aspect of plant tissue culture investigated, as indicated
earlier. Progress has been made in the culture of photoautotrophic cells
(82,83). In vitro cultures, particularly cell suspensions, have become very useful
in the study of both primary and secondary metabolism (84). In addition to
providing protoplasts from which intact and viable organelles were obtained
for study (e.g., vacuoles) (85), cell suspensions have been used to study the
regulation of inorganic nitrogen and sulfur assimilation (86), carbohydrate
metabolism (87), and photosynthetic carbon metabolism (88,89); thus clearly
showing the usefulness of cell cultures for elucidating pathway activity. Most
of the work on secondary metabolism was related to the potential of cultured
cells to form commercial products, but has also yielded basic biochemical
information (90,91).
Morphogenesis or the origin of form is an area of research with which tissue
culture has long been associated; and one to which tissue culture has made
significant contributions both in terms of fundamental knowledge and application
(1). Xylogenesis or tracheary element formation has been used to study
cytodifferentation (92–94). In particular the optimization of the Zinnia mesophyll
single cell system has dramatically improved our knowledge of this process.
The classical findings of Skoog and Miller (31) on the hormonal balance
for organogenesis has continued to influence research on this topic; a concept
supported more recently by transformation of cells with appropriately modified
Agrobacterium T-DNA (95,96). However, it is clear from the literature
that several additional factors, including other growth active substances, interact
with auxin and cytokinin to bring about de novo organogenesis (97). In
addition to bulky explants, such as cotyledons, hypocotyls, and callus (97),
thin (superficial) cell layers (98,99) have been used in traditional morphogenic
studies, as well as to produce de novo organs and plantlets in hundreds of plant
species (50,100). As well, physiological and biochemical studies on organoPlant Tissue Culture 15
genesis have been carried out (97,101,102). The third area of morphogenesis,
somatic embryogenesis, also developed in this period with over 130 species
reported to form the bipolar structures by the early 1980s (103,104). Successful
culture was achieved with cereals, grasses, legumes, and conifers, previously
considered to be recalcitrant groups. The development of a single cell to
embryo system in carrot (105) has allowed for an in depth study of the process.
Cell cultures have continued to play an important role in the study of plantmicrobe
interaction, not only in tumorigenesis (106), but also on the biochemistry
of virus multiplication (107), phytotoxin action (108), and disease
resistance, particularly as affected by phytoalexins (109). Without doubt the
most important studies in this area dealt with Agrobacteria, and although aimed
mainly at plant improvement (see Subheading 3.2.) provided good fundamental
information (96).
3.2. Plant Modification and Improvement
During this period, in vitro methods were used increasingly as an adjunct to
traditional breeding methods for the modification and improvement of plants.
The technique of controlled in vitro pollination on the stigma, placenta, or ovule
has been used for the production of interspecific and intergeneric hybrids, overcoming
sexual self-incompatibility, and the induction of haploid plants (109).
Embryo, ovary, and ovule cultures have been used in overcoming embryo inviability,
monoploid production in barley and in overcoming seed dormancy and
related problems (110,112). In particular, embryo rescue has played a most
important role in producing interspecific and intergeneric hybrids (113).
By the early 1980s, androgenesis had been reported in some 171 species,
many of which were important crop plants (114). Gynogenesis was reported in
some 15 species, in some of which androgenesis was not successful (115). The
value of these haploids was that they could be used to detect mutations and for
recovery of unique recombinants, because there is no masking of recessive
alleles. As well, the production of double haploids allowed for hybrid production
and their integration into breeding programs.
Cell cultures have also played an important role in plant modification and
improvement, as they offer advantages for isolation of variants (116). Although
tissue culture-produced variants have been known since the 1940s (e.g., habituation),
it was only in the 1970s that attempts were made to utilize them for plant
improvement. This somaclonal variation is dependent on the natural variation
in a population of cells, either pre-existing or culture-induced, and is usually
observed in regenerated plantlets (117). The variation may be genetic or epigenetic
and is not simple in origin (118,119). The changes in the regenerated
plantlets have potential agricultural and horticultural significance, but this
potential has not yet been realized. It has also been possible to produce a wide16 Thorpe
spectrum of mutant cells in culture (120). These include cells showing biochemical
differences, antibiotic, herbicide, and stress resistance. In addition,
auxotrophs, autotrophs, and those with altered developmental systems have
been selected in culture; usually the application of the selective agent in the
presence of a mutagen is required. However, in only a few cases has it been
possible to regenerate plants with the desired traits (e.g., herbicide-resistant
tobacco) (121), and methyl tryptophan-resistant Datura innoxia (122).
By 1985, nearly 100 species of angiosperms could be regenerated from protoplasts
(123). The ability to fuse plant protoplasts by chemical (e.g., with polyethylene
glycol [PEG]) and physical means (e.g., electrofusion) allowed for
production of somatic hybrid plants; the major problem being the ability to
regenerate plants from the hybrid cells (124,125). Protoplast fusion has been
used to produce unique nuclear-cytoplasmic combinations. In one such example,
Brassica campestris chloroplasts coding for atrazine resistance (obtained from
protoplasts) were transferred into B. napus protoplasts with Raphanus sativus
cytoplasm (which confers cytoplasmic male sterility from its mitochondria).
The selected plants contained B. napus nuclei, chloroplasts from B. campestris
and mitochondria from R. sativus, had the desired traits in a B. napus phenotype,
and could be used for hybrid seed production (126). Unfortunately, only
a few such examples exist to date.
Genetic modification of plants has been achieved by direct DNA transfer
via vector-independent and vector-dependent means since the early 1980s.
Vector-independent methods with protoplasts include electroporation (127),
liposome fusion (128), and microinjection (129), as well as high-velocity
microprojectile bombardment (biolistics) (130). This latter method can be
executed with cells, tissues, and organs. The use of Agrobacterium in vectormediated
transfer has progressed very rapidly since the first reports of stable
transformation (131,132). Although the early transformations utilized protoplasts,
regenerable organs such as leaves, stems, and roots have been subsequently
used (133,134). Much of the research activity utilizing these tools has
focused on engineering important agricultural traits for the control of insects,
weeds, and plant diseases.
3.3. Pathogen-Free Plants and Germplasm Storage
Although these two uses of in vitro technology may appear unrelated, a
major use of pathogen-free plants is for germplasm storage and the movement
of living material across international borders (1). The ability to rid plants of
viruses, bacteria, and fungi by culturing meristem-tips has been widely used
since the 1960s. The approach is particularly needed for virus-infected material,
because bactericidal and fungicidal agents can be used successfully inPlant Tissue Culture 17
ridding plants of bacteria and fungi (22). Meristem-tip culture is often coupled
with thermotherapy or chemotherapy for virus eradication (135).
Traditionally, germplasm has been maintained as seed, but the ability to
regenerate whole plants from somatic and gametic cells and shoot apices has
led to their use for storage (22,135). Three in vitro approaches have been
developed, namely use of growth retarding compounds (e.g., maleic hydrazide,
B995, and abscisic acid [ABA]) (136), low nonfreezing temperatures (1–9°C)
(22), and cryopreservation (135). In this last approach, cell suspensions, shoot
apices, asexual embryos, and young plantlets, after treatment with a
cryoprotectant, is frozen and stored at the temperature of liquid nitrogen (ca.
–196°C) (135,137).
3.4. Clonal Propagation
The use of tissue culture technology for the vegetative propagation of plants
is the most widely used application of the technology. It has been used with all
classes of plants (138,139), although some problems still need to be resolved
(e.g., hyperhydricity, abberant plants). There are three ways by which
micropropagation can be achieved. These are enhancing axillary bud breaking,
production of adventitious buds directly or indirectly via callus, and somatic
embryogenesis directly or indirectly on explants (50,138). Axillary bud breaking
produces the smallest number of plantlets, but they are generally genetically
true-to-type; whereas somatic embryogenesis has the potential to produce
the greatest number of plantlets, but is induced in the lowest number of plant
species. Commercially, numerous ornamentals are produced, mainly via axillary
bud breaking (140). As well, there are many lab-scale protocols for other
classes of plants, including field and vegetable crops, fruit, plantation, and forest
trees, but cost of production is often a limiting factor in their use commercially
(141).
3.5. Product Formation
Higher plants produce a large number of diverse organic chemicals, which
are of pharmaceutical and industrial interest. The first attempt at the largescale
culture of plant cells for the production of pharmaceuticals took place in
the 1950s at the Charles Pfizer Co. The failure of this effort limited research in
this area in the United States, but work elsewhere in Germany and Japan in
particular, led to development, so that by 1978 the industrial application of cell
cultures was considered feasible (142). Furthermore, by 1987, there were 30
cell culture systems that were better producers of secondary metabolites than
the respective plants (143). Unfortunately, many of the economically important
plant products are either not formed in sufficiently large quantities or not
at all by plant cell cultures. Different approaches have been taken to enhance18 Thorpe
yields of secondary metabolites. These include cell cloning and the repeated
selection of high-yielding strains from heterogenous cell populations (142,144)
and by using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and radioimmunoassay
techniques (145). Another approach involves selection of mutant cell
lines that overproduce the desired product (146). As well, both abiotic factors—
such as ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, exposure to heat or cold and salts of
heavy metals—and biotic elicitors of plant and microbial origin, have been
shown to enhance secondary product formation (147,148). Lastly, the use of
immobilized cell technology has also been examined (149,150).
Central to the success of producing biologically active substances commercially
is the capacity to grow cells on a large scale. This is being achieved
using stirred tank reactor systems and a range of air-driven reactors (141). For
many systems, a two-stage (or two-phase) culture process has been tried
(151,152). In the first stage, rapid cell growth and biomass accumulation are
emphasized, whereas the second stage concentrates on product synthesis with
minimal cell division or growth. However, by 1987 the naphthoquinone,
shikonin, was the only commercially produced secondary metabolite by cell
cultures (153).
4. The Present
During the 1990s, continued expansion in the application of in vitro technologies
to an increasing number of plant species was observed. Tissue culture
techniques are being used with all types of plants, including cereals and grasses
(154), legumes (155), vegetable crops (156), potato (157) and other root and
tuber crops (158), oilseeds (159), temperate (160) and tropical (161) fruits, plantation
crops (162), forest trees (163), and, of course, ornamentals (164). As can
be seen from these articles, the application of in vitro cell technology went well
beyond micropropagation, and embraced all the in vitro approaches that were
relevant or possible for the particular species, and the problem(s) being addressed.
However, only limited success has been achieved in exploiting
somaclonal variation (165), or in the regeneration of useful plantlets from mutant
cells (166); also, the early promise of protoplast technology has remained
largely unfulfilled (167). Substantial progress has been made in extending
cryopreservation technology for germplasm storage (168) and in artificial seed
technology (169). Some novel approaches for culturing cells such as on rafts,
membranes, and glass rods, as well as manipulation of the culture environment
by use of non-ionic surfactants have been successfully developed (170).
Cell cultures have remained an important tool in the study of plant biology.
Thus progress is being made in cell biology, for example, in studies of the
cytoskeleton (171), on chromosomal changes in cultured cells (172), and in
cell-cycle studies (173,174). Better physiological and biochemical tools havePlant Tissue Culture 19
allowed for a re-examination of neoplastic growth in cell cultures during
habituation and hyperhydricity, and relate it to possible cancerous growth in
plants (175). Cell cultures have remained an extremely important tool in the
study of primary metabolism; for example, the use of cell suspensions to
develop in vitro transcription systems (176), or the regulation of carbohydrate
metabolism in transgenics (177). The development of medicinal plant cell culture
techniques has led to the identification of more than 80 enzymes of alkaloid
biosynthesis (reviewed in ref. 178). Similar information arising from the
use of cell cultures for molecular and biochemical studies on other areas of
secondary metabolism, is generating research activity on metabolic engineering
of plant secondary metabolite production (179).
Cell cultures remain an important tool in the study of morphogenesis, even
though the present use of developmental mutants, particularly of Arabidopsis,
is adding valuable information on plant development (see ref. 180). Molecular,
physiological, and biochemical studies have allowed for an indepth understanding
of cytodifferentiation, mainly tracheary element formation (181),
organogenesis (182,183), and somatic embryogenesis (184–186).
Advances in molecular biology are allowing for the genetic engineering of
plants, through the precise insertion of foreign genes from diverse biological
systems. Three major breakthroughs have played major roles in the development
of this transformation technology (187). These are the development of
shuttle vectors for harnessing the natural gene transfer capability of Agrobacterium
(188), the methods to use these vectors for the direct transformation of
regenerable explants obtained from plant organs (189), and the development of
selectable markers (190). For species not amenable to Agrobacterium-mediated
transformation, physical, chemical, and mechanical means are used to get the
DNA into the cells. With these latter approaches, particularly biolistics (191), it
has become possible to transform virtually any plant species and genotype.
The initial wave of research in plant biotechnology has been driven mainly
by the seed and agri-chemical industries, and has concentrated on agronomic
traits of direct relevance to these industries, namely the control of insects,
weeds, and plant diseases (192). At present, over 100 species of plants have
been genetically engineered, including nearly all the major dicotyledonous
crops and an increasing number of monocotyledonous ones, as well as some
woody plants. Current research is leading to routine gene transfer systems for
all important crops; for example, the production of golden rice (193). In addition,
technical improvements are further increasing transformation efficiency,
extending transformation to elite commercial germplasm and lowering
transgenic plant production costs. The next wave in agricultural biotechnology
is already in progress with biotechnological applications of interest to the food
processing, speciality chemical, and pharmaceutical industries.20 Thorpe
The current emphasis and importance of plant biotechnology can be gleamed
from the last two International Congresses on Plant Tissue and Cell Culture
and Biotechnology held in Israel in June 1998, and in the United States in June
2002. The theme of the Israeli Congress was Plant Biotechnology and In Vitro
Biology in the 21st Century and the theme of the last Congress was Plant Biotechnology
2002 and Beyond. The proceedings for these two congresses (194,
195) were developed through a scientific program that focused on the most
important developments, both basic and applied, in the areas of plant tissue
culture and molecular biology and their impact on plant improvement and biotechnology.
They clearly show where tissue culture is today and where it is
heading (i.e., as an equal partner with molecular biology), as a tool in basic
plant biology and in various areas of application. In fact, progress in applied
plant biotechnology is fully matching and is without doubt stimulating fundamental
scientific progress, which remains the best hope for achieving sustainable
and environmentally stable agriculture (196). Indeed, the advancements
made in the last 100 yr with in vitro technology have gone well beyond what
Haberlandt and the other pioneers could have imagined.
References
1. Thorpe, T. A. (1990) The current status of plant tissue culture, in Plant Tissue
Culture: Applications and Limitations (Bhojwani, S. S., ed.), Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp. 1–33.
2. Haberlandt, G. (1902) Kulturversuche mit isolierten Pflanzenzellen. Sitzungsber.
Akad. Wiss. Wien. Math.-Naturwiss. Kl., Abt. J. 111, 69–92.
3. Krikorian, A. D. and Berquam, D. L. (1969) Plant cell and tissue cultures: the
role of Haberlandt. Botan. Rev. 35, 59–67.
4. Kotte, W. (1922) Kulturversuche mit isolierten Wurzelspitzen. Beitr. Allg. Bot.
2, 413–434.
5. Robbins, W. J. (1922) Cultivation of excised root tips and stem tips under sterile
conditions. Bot. Gaz. 73, 376–390.
6. White, P. R. (1934) Potentially unlimited growth of excised tomato root tips in a
liquid medium. Plant Physiol. 9, 585–600.
7. Street, H. E. (1969) Growth in organized and unorganized systems, in Plant Physiology
(Steward, F. C., ed.), Vol. 5B, Academic Press, New York, pp. 3–224.
8. Loo, S. W. (1945) Cultivation of excised stem tips of asparagus in vitro. Am. J.
Bot. 32, 13-17.
9. Ball, E. (1946) Development in sterile culture of stems tips and subjacent regions
of Tropaeolum malus L. and of Lupinus albus L. Am. J. Bot. 33, 301–318.
10. Monnier, M. (1995) Culture of zygotic embryos, in In Vitro Embryogenesis in
Plants (Thorpe, T. A., ed.), Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp.
117–153.
11. Laibach, F. (1929) Ectogenesis in plants. Methods and genetic possibilities of
propagating embryos otherwise dying in the seed. J. Hered. 20, 201–208.Plant Tissue Culture 21
12. Tukey, H. B. (1934) Artificial culture methods for isolated embryos of deciduous
fruits. Proc. Am. Soc. Hortic. Sci. 32, 313–322.
13. LaRue, C. D. (1936) The growth of plant embryos in culture. Bull. Torrey Bot.
Club 63, 365–382.
14. Gautheret, R. J. (1934) Culture du tissus cambial. C.R. Hebd. Seances Acad. Sc.
198, 2195–2196.
15. Gautheret, R. J. (1935) Recherches sur la culture des tissus végétaux. Ph.D. Thesis,
Paris.
16. Gautheret, R. J. (1939) Sur la possibilité de réaliser la culture indéfinie des tissus
de tubercules de carotte. C.R. Hebd. Seances Acad. Sc. 208, 118–120.
17. Nobécourt, P. (1939) Sur la pérennité et l’augmentation de volume des cultures
de tissues végétaux. C.R. Seances Soc. Biol. Ses Fil. 130, 1270–1271.
18. White, P. R. (1939) Potentially unlimited growth of excised plant callus in an
artificial nutrient. Am. J. Bot. 26, 59–64.
19. Nobécourt, P. (1939) Sur les radicelles naissant des cultures de tissus végétaux.
C.R. Seances Soc. Biol. Ses Fil. 130, 1271–1272.
20. White, P .R. (1939) Controlled differentiation in a plant tissue culture. Bull.
Torrey Bot. Club 66, 507–513.
21. White, P. R. (1963) The Cultivation of Animal and Plant Cells, 2nd ed., Ronald
Press, New York.
22. Bhojwani, S. S. and Razdan, M. K. (1983) Plant Tissue Culture: Theory and
Practice. Developments in Crop Science, Vol. 5. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
23. Gautheret, R. J. (1985) History of plant tissue and cell culture: A personal account,
in Cell Culture and Somatic Cell Genetics of Plants (Vasil, I. K., ed.), Vol.
2, Academic Press, New York, pp. 1–59.
24. Thorpe, T. A. (2000) History of plant cell culture. Chap. 1, in Plant Tissue Culture:
Techniques and Experiments, (Smith, R. H., ed.) 2nd ed., Academic Press,
California, pp. 1–32. (With permission from Elsevier).
25. Van Overbeek, J., Conklin, M. E., and Blakeslee, A. F. (1941) Factors in coconut
milk essential for growth and development of very young Datura embryos. Science
94, 350–351.
26. Gautheret, R. J. (1942) Hétéro-auxines et cultures de tissus végétaux. Bull. Soc.
Chim. Biol. 24, 13–41.
27. Gautheret, R. J. (1955) Sur la variabilité des propriétés physiologiques des cultures
de tissues végétaux. Rev. Gén. Bot. 62, 5–112.
28. Nobécourt, P. (1955) Variations de la morphologie et de la structure de cultures
de tissues végétaux. Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges. 65, 475–480.
29. Skoog, F. and Tsui, C. (1948) Chemical control of growth and bud formation in
tobacco stem segments and callus cultured in vitro. Am. J. Bot. 35, 782–787.
30. Miller, C., Skoog, F., Von Saltza, M. H., and Strong, F. M. (1955) Kinetin, a cell
division factorfrom desoxyribonucleic acid. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 77, 1392.
31. Skoog, F. and Miller, C. O. (1957) Chemical regulation of growth and organ
formation in plant tissue cultures in vitro. Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol. 11, 118–131.
32. Evans, D. A., Sharp, W. R., and Flick, C. E. (1981) Growth and behavior of cell
cultures: Embryogenesis and organogenesis, in Plant Tissue Culture: Methods22 Thorpe
and Applications in Agriculture (Thorpe, T. A., ed.), Academic Press, New York,
pp. 45–113.
33. Letham, D. S. (1974) Regulators of cell division in plant tissues. The cytokinins
of coconut milk. Physiol. Plant. 32, 66–70.
34. Reinert, J. (1958) Utersuchungen die Morphogenese an Gewebeku1turen. Ber.
Dtsch. Bot. Ges. 71, 15.
35. Reinert, J. (1959) Uber die Kontrolle der Morphogenese und die Induktion von
Adventivembryonen an Gewebekulturen aus Karotten. Planta 53, 318–333.
36. Steward, F. C., Mapes, M. O., and Mears, K. (1958) Growth and organized development
of cultured cells. II. Organization in cultures grown from freely suspended
cells. Am. J. Bot. 45, 705–708.
37. Muir, W.H., Hildebrandt, A.C., and Riker, A.J. (1954) Plant tissue cultures produced
from single isolated plant cells. Science 119, 877–878.
38. Muir, W. H., Hildebrandt, A. C., and Riker, A. J. (1958) The preparation, isolation
and growth in culture of single cells from higher plants. Am. J. Bot. 45, 585–597.
39. Jones, L. E., Hildebrandt, A. C., Riker, A. J., and Wu, J. H. (1960) Growth of
somatic tobacco cells in microculture. Am. J. Bot. 47, 468–475.
40. Bergmann, L. (1959) A new technique for isolating and cloning cells of higher
piarits. Nature 184, 648–649.
41. Kohlenbach, H. W. (1959) Streckungs-und Teilungswachstum isolierter
Mesophyllzellen von Macleaya cordata (Wild.) R. Br. Naturwissenschaften 46,
116–117.
42. Kohlenbach, H. W. (1966) Die Entwicklungspotenzen explantierter und isolierter
Dauerzellen. I. Das Strechungs- und Teilungswachstum isolierter
Mesophyllzellen von Macleaya cordata Z. Pflanzenphysiol. 55, 142–157.
43. Tulecke, W. and Nickell, L. G. (1959) Production of large amounts of plant tissue
by submerged culture. Science 130, 863–864.
44. Vasil, V. and Hildebrandt, A. C. (1965) Differentiation of tobacco plants from
single, isolated cells in micro cultures. Science 150, 889–892.
45. Heller, R. (1953) Recherches sur la nutrition minerale des tissus végétaux cultivé
in vitro. Ann. Sci. Nat. Bot. BioI. Veg. 14, 1–223.
46. Nitsch, J. P. and Nitsch, C. (1956) Auxin-dependent growth of excised Helianthus
tuberosus tissues. Am. J. Bot. 43, 839–851.
47. Murashige, T. and Skoog, F. (1962) A revised medium for rapid growth and
bioassays with tobacco tissue cultures. Physiol. Plant. 15, 473–497.
48. Gamborg, O. L., Murashige, T., Thorpe, T. A., and Vasil, I. K. (1976) Plant tissue
culture media. In Vitro 12, 473–478.
49. Morel, G. (1960). Producing virus-free cymbidium. Am. Orchid Soc. Bull. 29,
495–497.
50. Murashige, T. (1974) Plant propagation through tissue culture. Annu. Rev. Plant
Physiol. 25, 135–166.
51. White, P. R. (1934) Multiplication of the viruses of tobacco and Aucuba mosaics
in growing excised tomato root tips. Phytopathology 24, 1003–1011.Plant Tissue Culture 23
52. Limasset, P. and Cornuet, P. (1949) Recherche du virus de la mosaïque du tabac
dans les méristèmes des plantes infectées. C.R. Hebd. Seances Acad. Sci. 228,
1971–1972.
53. Morel, G. and Martin, C. (1952) Guérison de dahlias atteints d’une maladie á
virus. C.R. Hebd. Seances Acad. Sc. 235, 1324–1325.
54. Quack, F. (1961) Heat treatment and substances inhibiting virus multiplication in
meristem culture to obtain virus-free plants. Adv. Hortic. Sci. Their Appl., Proc.
Int. Hortic. Congr. 15th, 1958 1, 144–148.
55. LaRue, C. D. (1942) The rooting of flowers in culture. Bull. Torrey Bot. Club 69,
332–341.
56. Rangan, T. S. (1982) Ovary, ovule and nucellus culture, in Experimental Embryology
of Vascular Plants (Johri, B. M., ed.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 105–129.
57. LaRue, C. D. (1949) Culture of the endosperm of maize. Am. J. Bot. 36, 798.
58. Johri, B. M. and Bhojwani, S. S. (1965) Growth responses of mature endosperm
in cultures. Nature 208, 1345–1347.
59. Kanta, K., Rangaswamy, N. S., and Maheshwari, P. (1962) Test-tube fertilization
in flowering plants. Nature 194, 1214–1217.
60. Zenkteler, M., Misiura, E., and Guzowska, I. (1975) Studies on obtaining hybrid
embryos in test tubes, in Form, Structure and Function in Plants (Mohan
Ram, H. Y., Shaw, J. J., and Shaw, C. K., eds.), Sarita Prakashan, Meerut, India,
pp. 180–187.
61. Tulecke, W. (1953) A tissue derived from the pollen of Ginkgo biloba. Science
117, 599–600.
62. Yamada, T., Shoji, T., and Sinoto, Y. (1963) Formation of calli and free cells in
a tissue culture of Tradescantia reflexa. Bot. Mag. 76, 332–339.
63. Guha, S. and Maheshwari, S. C. (1964) In vitro production of embryos from
anthers of Datura. Nature 204, 497.
64. Guha, S. and Maheshwari, S. C. (1966) Cell division and differentiation of
embryos in the pollen grains of Datura in vitro. Nature 212, 97–98.
65. Bourgin, J.P. and Nitch, J.P. (1967) Obtention de Nicotiana haploides à partir
de’étamines cultivées in vitro. Ann. Physiol. Vég. 9, 377–382.
66. Cocking, E. C. (1960) A method for the isolation of plant protoplasts and vacuoles.
Nature 187, 927–929.
67. Takebe, I., Labib, C., and Melchers, G. (1971) Regeneration of whole plants from
isolated mesophyll protoplasts of tobacco. Naturwissenschaften 58, 318–320.
68. Carlson, P. S., Smith, H. H., and Dearing, R. D. (1972) Parasexual interspecific
plant hybridization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 69, 2292–2294.
69. Braun, A. C. (1941) Development of secondary tumor and tumor strands in the
crown-gall of sunflowers. Phytopathology 31, 135–149.
70. Braun, A. C. and White, P. R. (1943) Bacteriological sterility of tissues derived
from secondary crown-gall tumors. Phytopathology 33, 85–100.
71. Braun, A. C. (1950) Thermal inactivation studies on the tumor inducing principle
in crown-gall. Phytopathology 40, 3.24 Thorpe
72. Zaenen, I., van Larebeke, N., Touchy, H., Van Montagu, M., and Schell, J. (1974)
Super-coiled circular DNA in crown-gall inducing Agrobacterium strains. J. Mol.
BioI. 86, 109–127.
73. Ledoux, L. (1965) Uptake of DNA by living cells. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol.
Biol. 4, 231–267.
74. Vasil, I. K. (ed.) (1994) Cell Culture and Somatic Cell Genetics of Plants, Vol. 1,
Laboratory Procedures and Their Applications. Academic Press, New York.
75. Vasil, I. K. and Thorpe, T. A. (eds.) (1994) Plant Cell and Tissue Culture, Kluwer
Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
76. Yeoman, M. M. and Street, H. E. (1977) General cytology of cultured cells, in
Plant Tissue and Cell Culture (Street, H. E., ed.), Blackwell Scientific, Oxford,
pp. 137–176.
77. Lindsey, K. and Yeoman, M. M. (1985) Dynamics of plant cell cultures, in Cell
Culture and Somatic Cell Genetics of Plants (Vasil, I. K., ed.), Vol. 2, Academic
Press, New York, pp. 61–101.
78. Fowke, L.C. (1986) Ultrastructural cytology of cultured plant tissues, cells, and
protoplasts, in Cell Culture and Somatic Cell Genetics of Plants (Vasil, I. K.,
ed.), Vol. 3, Academic Press, New York, pp. 323–342.
79. Fowke, L. C. (1987) Investigations of cell structure using cultured cells and protoplasts,
in Plant Tissue and Cell Culture (Green, C. E., Somers, D. A., Hackett,
W. P., and Biesboer, D. D., eds.), A. R. Liss, New York, pp. 17–31.
80. D’Amato, F. (1978) Chromosome number variation in cultured cells and regenerated
plants, in Frontiers of Plant Tissue Culture 1978 (Thorpe, T. A., ed.), Intl.
Assoc. Plant Tissue Culture, Univ. of Calgary Printing Services, pp. 287–295.
81. Nagl, W., Pohl, J., and Radler, A. (1985) The DNA endoreduplication cycles, in
The Cell Division Cycle in Plants (Bryant, J. A. and Francis, D., eds.), Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 217–232.
82. Yamada, Y., Fumihiko, S., and Hagimori, M. (1978) Photoautotropism in green
cultured cells, in Frontiers of Plant Tissue Culture 1978 (Thorpe, T. A., ed.), Intl.
Assoc. Plant Tissue Culture, Univ. of Calgary Printing Services, pp. 453–462.
83. Hüsemann, W. (1985) Photoautotrophic growth of cells in culture, in Cell Culture
and Somatic Cell Genetics of Plants (Vasil, I. K., ed.), Vol. 2, Academic
Press, New York, pp. 213–252.
84. Neumann, K.-H., Barz, W., and Reinhard, E. (eds.) (1985) Primary and Secondary
Metabolism of Plant Cell Cultures, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
85. Leonard, R. T. and Rayder, L. (1985) The use of protoplasts for studies on membrane
transport in plants, in Plant Protoplasts (Fowke, L. C. and Constabel, F.,
eds.), CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 105–118.
86. Filner, P. (1978) Regulation of inorganic nitrogen and sulfur assimilation in cell
suspension cultures, in Frontiers of Plant Tissue Culture 1978 (Thorpe, T. A.,
ed.), Intl. Assoc. Plant Tissue Culture, Univ. of Calgary Printing Services, pp.
437–442.
87. Fowler, M. W. (1978) Regulation of carbohydrate metabolism in cell suspension
cultures, in Frontiers of Plant Tissue Culture 1978 (Thorpe, T. A., ed.), Intl.
Assoc. Plant Tissue Culture, Univ. of Calgary Printing Services, pp. 443–452.Contamination Management 35
35
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 318: Plant Cell Culture Protocols, Second Edition
Edited by: V. M. Loyola-Vargas and F. Vázquez-Flota © Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
3
Pathogen and Biological Contamination Management
The Road Ahead
Alan C. Cassells and Barbara M. Doyle
Summary
Multiplication of certified pathogen-free stock plants in vitro makes an important contribution
to the production of disease-free planting material for vegetatively propagated crops. Meristem
culture is extensively used to eliminate pathogens and contaminants from microbially
contaminated plants prior to micropropagation. The approach to pathogen and contamination
management differs. It is essential to avoid the release of pathogen-contaminated microplants
and to ensure this the plant pathogen-testing guidelines and protocols issued by the Food and
Agriculture Organisation (FAO) and its regional representative organizations should be followed.
Where in vitro methods are used to eliminate pathogens, the progeny plants should be
established in vivo under quarantine conditions and tested under FAO guidelines before being
used as stock plants for in vitro multiplication. At establishment of microplants in vitro (stage
1), cultures should be culture-indexed for the presence of microbial contaminants. If pathogenand
contaminant-free cultures are established, then the risk is that of managing laboratory contamination
by common environmental microorganisms based on Hazard Analysis Critical Control
Points (HACCP) principles.
International plant health certification organizations are conservative and rely on established
pathogen indexing protocols. They are reluctant to accept DNA-based tests and do not
accept testing of in vitro cultures. Given that in time both of these restrictions may be relaxed,
micropropagators may look forward to availing more of diagnostic service providers using
polymerase chain reaction-based multiplex assays for pathogen-indexing and advances in diagnostic
kits for environmental microorganisms in support of laboratory contamination management;
with the caveat that molecular tests for pathogens may continue to require confirmation
by inoculation of indicator plant species.
Key Words: Environmental microorganisms; HACCP; meristem culture; molecular beacons;
multiplex assays; PCR.36 Cassells and Doyle
1. Introduction
Biotic contamination in tissue culture is caused by the entry into culture of
pathogens and other microbial contaminants on or in the explants used to initiate
the cultures, and by entry of environmental microorganisms and microarthropods
during the in vitro culture stages (see Fig. 1). Biotic contaminants
associated with the explants used to establish cultures are usually pathogens of
the crop or opportunistic colonizers of the plant (1). The latter may be organisms
abundant in the environment of the plants that were not excluded during
apical meristem explant preparation or microorganisms that escaped surface
sterilization by persistence in biofilms, in surface niches or as endophytes. Such
contaminants may remain latent in the explants and in regenerated plants, to
transmit disease or contamination through the progeny plants, or they may
emerge during culture when suppressive media factors are removed or the
medium is diluted, to overrun the cultures. When clean (aseptic) cultures are
established, biotic contamination can occur during the in vitro stages. In this
case the contaminants are environmental microorganisms, human-associated
microorganisms, and micro-arthropods (see Fig. 1; [2–4]). Typically, these microorganisms
are non-fastidious and their presence can be seen by visual inspection
of the cultures.
The distinction between plant pathogens (phytopathogens) and environmental
contaminants in tissue culture is in many instances a case of role reversal.
Phytopathogens may be latent in tissues in vitro (i.e., be symptomless) whereas
environmental organisms may rapidly overgrow the explant, killing the tissues
by becoming vitropathogens. The risk with phytopathogen contamination is
that of clonal propagation and possible international distribution and environmental
release of pathogens; the risk from contamination with vitropathogens
is loss of the cultures. A further distinction is that vitropathogens are mainly
non-fastidious environmental fungi and bacteria whereas phytopathogens are
mainly intracellular non-cultivable viruses and viroids or fastidious inter- or
intra-cellular bacteria. The identification of phytopathogens may require diagnostics
and diagnostic protocols, which in the case of plant health certification
schemes are prescribed by international regulatory authorities (5).
The consequences of the distinction both in the character of the contaminants
and in the sequence of their occurrence in tissue culture, is that pathogen
and biological contamination management, arguably, are best managed by two
strategies. Phytopathogens and opportunistic endophytes and surface contaminants
should be eliminated at the stage of establishment of the cultures and
contamination management in the laboratory, caused by vitropathogens, is best
managed by good working practice (6). This approach will be discussed further
here with emphasis on emerging “omics” (genomic, proteomic, and
metabolomic) identification methods.Contamination Management 37
2. Diagnostics and Diagnosis
In plant health certification, the requirement is to be able to distinguish
between non-pathogenic and pathogenic isolates and to distinguish between
races of pathovars, where pathovars are defined as “a strain or set of strains
with the same or similar characteristics differentiated at infrasubspecific level
from other strains of the same species or subspecies on the basis of distinctive
pathogenicity to one or more host plants.” Classification of a taxon as a
pathovar does not exclude recognition of difference in biochemical, serological,
or other non-pathogenic characters between that and other pathovars of the
same species or subspecies, but implies that at the infrasubspecific level other
differences are considered to have less significance in comparison to differences
in pathogenicity. Usually pathovars are distinguished in terms of proved
differences in host range. However, clear differences in symptomatology on
the same plant species (e.g., Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryzae and X.
campestris pv. oryzicola) can warrant different pathovar designation
(www.ag.uidaho.cdu/bacteriology/pathovar.html). Consequently, to confirm
the identity of a pathovar or pathovar race putatively identified by any test
method where the pathogenicity gene(s) or gene product(s) are not detected by
the method may require inoculation of an indicator host plant.
Fig. 1. A scheme illustrating a two-phase strategy for managing contamination in
tissue culture where the focus is on pathogen-indexing and pathogen and contaminant
elimination before or at the establishment of the cultures and good laboratory working
practice is used to exclude environmental organisms during the in vitro stages.38 Cassells and Doyle
Table 1
Characteristics of CCP Biomarkers
Indicator Quick test
organism Type Characteristics or reference
Pseudomonas Gram-negative, motile rods that oxidise (7)
fluorescens Eubacteriaceae glucose (1)
Erwinia spp. Eubacteriaceae Gram-negative, motile more than 4 (7)
peritrichous flagellae, grows
anaerobically (1)
Klebsiella spp. Eubacteriaceae (7)
Serratia spp. Eubacteriaceae Gram-negative, motile rods, highly mucoid api 20Ea
colonies, produces red pigment,
facultative anaerobes, oxidase negative,
nitrate positive (1)
Agrobacterium Eubacteriaceae Gram-negative, motile, non-spore forming (7)
spp. rods, grows on D-1 medium (1)
Bacillus spp. Eubacteriaceae Gram-positive, motile rods, produces (7)
large; gray-white colonies with irregular
margins on blood agar; produces
endospores when stressed; motile/nonmotile;
catalase positive (1)
Rhodotorula Basidiomycetes Unicellular (blasto-) conida globose api 20C
spp. to elongate which may be encapsulated; AUXa
pseudohyphae are absent or rudimentary;
colonies cream to pink, coral red, orange
or yellow in color
Penicillium Deuteromycetes Conidiophores arising from the mycelium (43)
spp. singly or less commonly in groups or fused,
branched near the apex, ending in spore
producing cells, the spores are
produced sequentially and form chains
Staplylococcus Euacteriaceae Gram-positive, non-motile, spherical api
spp. in clusters, anerobic fermentation of STAPHa
glucose with acid production, catalase,
nitrate, and coagulase positive.
Streptococcus Euacteriaceae Gram-positive, non-motile, spherical api
spp. in chains, aerobic action on glucose STREPa
catalase negative
Candida Saccharomycetales Produces blastospores, pseudohyphae, api
albicans and chlamydospores on cornmeal ID32Ca
Tween-80 agar at 25°C after 72 h
awww.biomerieux.fr
For a complete list of commercial diagnostic suppliers for bacterial and yeast biochemical detrection
kits see http://www.aoac.org/testkits/microbiologykits.htm.
In tissue culture in general, diagnostics are only required for pathovar identification;
however, if good laboratory management practice is followed there
will be an interest in identifying those laboratory contaminants, at least to geContamination Management 39
nus level, which may be indicators of sources of contamination (see Fig. 2 [6]).
The latter are mainly cultivable environmental microorganisms (yeasts and
bacteria) and can be identified by classical microbiological methods or by biochemical
test kits (e.g., see www.biomereiux.fr and Table 1). Historically,
plant associated-bacteria have been identified based on the Gram stain, morphology,
biochemical tests, and growth and colony characteristics on selective
media (7,8). Fungal including yeast contaminants are normally identified based
on morphology (9,10). Microarthropod contaminants are identified microscopically
(11). The following methods are used for pathogen and contaminant identification.
2.1. Conventional Methods
2.1.1. Microscopy Methods
Light microscopy is used extensively in the identification of fungal and bacterial
plant pathogens and culture contaminants. It is also used to characterize
and distinguish yeasts from bacteria and in bacterial identification, in combi-
Fig. 2. A flow diagram showing the stages in micropropagation that lists microorganisms
that indicate failure of equipment and aseptic techniques at the respective
stages.40 Cassells and Doyle
nation with simple biochemical tests and growth on selective media (7,8).
Gram-, capsule-, and flagella-staining are important in the identification of
bacteria. The critical control point (CCP) indicator yeasts, Rhodotorula spp.
and Candida albicans are identified microscopically (Table 1).
Thin-section electron microscopy (EM) can be used to study inter- and intracellular
pathogens (12) but is not used in routine diagnosis. Leaf-dip electron
microscopy, especially when combined with serological techniques (e.g.,
immuno-electron microscopy and immunogold electron microscopy) is a sensitive
technique but is limited by the high capital and running costs (13).
2.1.2. Biochemical Kits
Kits for bacterial and yeast identification based on miniaturised biochemical
tests are available from a number of companies (see www.aoac.org/testkits/
microbiologykits.htm). These kits are useful for the identification of laboratory
contaminants (common environmental microorganisms) but as identification
is based on a comparison of the biochemical profile of the unknown with a
reference database, their use in plant pathogen identification is limited as the
latter tend not to be on the databases. They involve some basic tests on the
microorganism (e.g., Gram stain, oxidase test) to categorize the organism for
the purpose of selecting the appropriate test kit (14). More useful for plant
bacterial pathogen identification is fatty acid profiling which involves extraction,
derivatization, separation, and identification of the fatty acids as some
fatty acids indicate taxonomic relationships (15).
2.1.3. Identification Based on Selective Culture Media
Growth on selective media, following staining and microscopic examination,
is a relatively low cost traditional strategy to identify bacteria to genus
level, which can be used for identification of CCP indicator organisms (see
Fig. 2 and Table 1). These methods are also applicable to the identification of
bacterial plant pathogens but in the latter case require inoculation of indicator
plants to confirm the pathogenicity and identify the pathovar (7,8).
2.1.4. Serological Diagnostics
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits are currently the most
widely used diagnostics for the identification of viral plant pathogens and are
commercially available (for example, see www.agdia.com). ELISA kits are
also available commercially for a limited number of plant bacterial and fungal
pathogens. It is essential that the negative/positive threshold is set correctly
and that negative results are validated by inoculation of indicator plants for
certification pathogens (16). Antibodies are also used in ISM (see Subheading
2.1.1.) and in latex agglutination tests (17). The development of protein arrayContamination Management 41
(protein chip) technology offers the prospect of antibody arrays for the detection
of multiple pathogens in the same sample (18). This technology should be
compared with multiplex DNA-based assays (see Subheading 2.1.5.1.).
2.1.5. “Omics” Methods
2.1.5.1. GENOMIC FINGERPRINTING
Increasing information is available on sequence data for pathogens (e.g.,
GenBank; www.ncbi.nih.gov/Genbank/). This facilitates primer design for
the detection of pathovars where the diagnostician can consult publicly available
databases and use the “Basic Local Alignment Search Tool” (BLAST) to
compare the primer sequences against previous deposits (http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/blast/ [19,20]). Exploiting unique sequences for pathovar identification
(e.g., argK-tox gene of P. syringae pv. phaseolicola) has an advantage in
terms of specificity but a disadvantage in terms of sensitivity for the detection
of single copy sequences (19). More commonly, ribosomal DNA is the target
for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification. It is composed of both transcribed
and non-transcribed sequences. The internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
regions (see Fig. 3) are nonconserved and can be targeted in specific amplification
events. This approach can identify pathogens to the species or subspecific
level (21) but may not identify to the pathovar level which may require
inoculation of indicator plants (Fig. 4).
The advances in technology for pathogen detection at the molecular level
allow for more manageable one-tube multiplex assays for the simultaneous
detection of a number of pathogens to be carried out (22), eliminating, in many
cases, the need for subsequent time-consuming gel-electrophoretic analysis of
PCR end products followed by confirmation of the amplicon (PCR amplification
product) (19). A multiplex assay for the simultaneous detection of two
viruses in potato tubers (Potato Leafroll Virus and Potato Virus Y) using differently
colored molecular beacons has been described by Klerks et al. (22).
An added benefit of these one-tube assays is the elimination of further possible
points of entry for DNA contamination during the detection protocol.
According to Bailey et al. (23) PCR offers the most sensitive means for
detecting plant pathogens. But even with the current advances in molecular
technology, sometimes detection of pathogens, for example, in asymptomatic
material may prove difficult. Latency is potentially a problem and as a consequence
identifying the source of the contaminant(s) can prove difficult (6). In
many cases experienced diagnosticians are still needed for diagnosis and
detection (19). Many service companies claim that a minimum 5–8 yr of
experience (which includes specialist training) is needed to perform these PCR
type assays (see www.mdpl.co.in/faq.asp) for what appears to be simple one42 Cassells and Doyle
tube assays where plant extract is added to off-the-shelf beads and the appropriate
signals are read (molecular beacons).
The obvious advantages of DNA-based diagnostics for virus detection over
host indexing or dot-blot assays using labeled probes, include efficiency and
reliability. Gosalvez et al. (24) highlighted the sensitivity of reverse transcriptase
(RT)-PCR (625× more sensitive) for the detection of Melon Necrotic
Spot Virus in melon leaves compared to dot blot assays.
Random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) analysis (an example of classical
PCR) has been used for the successful detection of many plant pathogens.
RAPD assays are reliant on the use of random primers (usually 10-mer) where
no prior knowledge of the genome is required. They can be used to determine
polymorphisms and generate molecular markers which can lead to the development
of specific primers. Rigotti et al. (25) reported on the application of
this technology for the detection of Botrytis cinerea in strawberry.
PCR-based diagnostics are becoming the “gold standard” for plant pathogen
identification (19). PCR-based assays can be examined under classical- or realtime.
Both share a common reliance on primer specificity for the successful
identification of a particular pathogen but there are a number of significant
differences between the two systems. One major difference between classical
and real-time PCR is the method employed for the detection of the PCR product.
Whereas classical PCR relies on Southern blot hybridization to unambiguously
determine the nature of the amplicon, real-time PCR can utilize in the
main three fluorescent methods: TaqMan® probes, fluorescent resonance
energy transfer (FRET) probes, and molecular probes (19). In real-time PCR
the intensity of the fluorescence of the sample is proportional to the amount of
PCR product that has accumulated during the reaction (26). This method of
detection of the PCR product obviates the need for further gel electrophoretic
Fig. 3. Schematic representation of basic repeat unit of nrDNA. (Reproduced with
permission from ref. 42.) ETS = external transcribed spacer; ITS = internal transcribed
spacer; NTS = non-transcribed spacer; IGS = intergenic spacer.Contamination Management 43
Fig. 4. Strategy for use of conventional and “omics” methods for pathogen identification
comparing conventional with “omics” strategies. Real-time polymerase chain
reaction can identify the pathogen group, specific pathogenicity factors can be potentially
identified by spectroscopy (e.g., MALDI-TOF and FTIR, respectively).
analysis. A frequent problem encountered with both types of PCR is inhibition
of the amplification step usually as a result of the presence of contaminating
material (e.g., polysaccharides or secondary metabolites in the reaction mix)
(27). Many protocols have been published on ways to “clean-up” the target
sample but this can result in a lower yield overall of extracted DNA. One way
around this is to use BIO-PCR which concomitantly increases the sensitivity of
the reaction by first incorporating an enrichment step into the procedure (28).
A further advantage here is that only viable cells are detected. Another alternative
for increasing the sensitivity of the PCR reaction is to use immunomagnetic
separation (19,27) whereby the target organism is extracted by binding to magnetic
beads that have been pre-coated with anti-rabbit immunoglobulin-G
washed with anti-target serum.
A method which combines PCR and ELISA was described by Bailey et al.
(23) for the identification to the species level for Phytophthora and Pythium. In
this report the ITS1 region (see Fig. 3) was sequenced for a number of species
from both genera and through sequence alignment a number of differences
were discovered which allowed for the preparation of particular capture probes44 Cassells and Doyle
which were complementary in sequence to the target DNA molecule(s). These
probes were biotin-labeled and immobilized in a microtiter plate coated with
streptavidin. The DIG (digoxygenin-11-UTP)-labeled amplicons that subsequently
bound to the capture probes were immunologically detected.
Aside from using the organism’s chromosomal DNA as a target in PCR
another target for amplification are plasmid sequences. But this procedure can
be problematic as these plasmid sequences are interchangeable between bacteria
(horizontal transfer). According to Schaad and Frederick (19), the use of
larger plasmids (megaplasmids) as a target, where the probability of horizontal
transfer is low, is preferred.
Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and temperature-gradient
gel electrophoresis (TGGE) are often used in microbial ecology for analyzing
microbial populations (29). These techniques allow for the separation of
amplicons of the same length but which differ with respect to their nucleotide
sequences. Watanabe et al. (29) compared bacterial universal primers (frequently
used in PCR/DGGE) with 16S rDNA sequences. An improvement in
the universal primers with the incorporation of the base inosine followed by
DGGE analyses allowed for greater levels of detection of environmental
samples than when compared to previous studies using PCR/DGGE.
2.1.5.2. PROTEOMIC FINGERPRINTING
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF)
based on analysis of whole intact bacteria is a rapid method of bacterial
identification based on biomarker protein analysis (30). Intact bacteria may be
analyzed. More information, however, can be obtained by fragmentation of
the bacteria and analysis of the total proteome (31). This method is also applicable
to fungi and viruses. The taxonomic relationship of the organism can be
obtained from stable membrane protein biomarkers, it may also be possible to
detect specific proteinaceous pathogenicity markers to identify to pathovar
level (32).
2.1.5.3. METABOLOMIC FINGERPRINTING
There are emerging techniques for the rapid identification of microorganisms
based on metabolomic analysis by micro-spectroscopy (e.g., yeast can be
identified by Fourier-Transformed Infra-Red [FT-IR] spectroscopy) (33). For
a review of this application see ref. 34.
2.2. Indexing for Plant Pathogens
In selecting stock plants for tissue culture, the main question is not whether
they are infected on the surface with pest or microorganisms that, in principle,
can be eliminated by surface sterilization of the explant, but whether there areContamination Management 45
inter- or intra-cellular endophytes that may enter the cultures to cause contamination.
Where stock plants are showing systemic disease symptoms, they
should preferably be rejected and disease escapes sought. If the latter are not
available, then meristem culture should be used to introduce the plants into
culture (35). There is, however, the risk that phytopathogens (as opposed to
vitropathogens) may be latent in the plant and in the established cultures and
so the stock plants must be formally indexed for specified pathogens in the
case of crops for certification. It is advisable that non-certified crops also be
indexed for major inter- and intra-cellular phytopathogens of the crop. Indexing
must comply with the current rules/guidelines of the regional certification
authority (e.g., The European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization
in the European Union [see guidelines for indexing at www.eppo.org] and
the North American Plant Protection Organization in the United States and
Canada [see guidelines for indexing at www.nappo.org]). In general, these organizations
are conservative and require that traditional indexing methods be
used. These are primarily based on transmission by mechanical inoculation or
grafting to indicator plants and ELISA.
Aside from the officially approved diagnostic tests, the certification agencies
specify the conditions (age of plant, tissue to be tested) under which the tests
must be carried out. One of the limitations is that the certification authorities do
not yet approve the testing of in vitro cultures (16). Consequently, where meristem
culture is used to eliminate phytopathogens, certification may require that
a sample of production be established and grown in vivo for indexing.
2.3. Establishment of Aseptic Cultures
Although a case can be made for searching for pathogen-free stock plants
and for rigorous indexing of the selected stock plants prior to their use in tissue
culture, in practice this is only mandatory where micropropagation is used in
official certification schemes (36). Commonly, the selection of the explant that
is used to introduce the plant into culture is made on the basis of the genetic
stability of the tissue in vitro (35). Leaf and petiole explants can be used from
plants, typically represented by Saintpaulia and Begonia, whose tissues are
considered to give rise to genetically stable adventitious shoots whereas cultures
of potato, which are unstable in adventitious regeneration, are usually
initiated from apical explants and multiplied as nodal cultures. In either case,
or where the cultures are being set up for experimental purposes, the criterion
of visible expression of contamination is generally used as an indicator of nonaseptic
status. Many studies have shown that this is not a reliable strategy.
Aside from the symptomless transmission of pathogens, there are also reported
cases of microbial contaminants been “suppressed” by components of the plant
tissue culture media. These may be clonally propagated or transmitted in sub46 Cassells and Doyle
culture to emerge and over run the cultures when the medium is changed (e.g.,
removal of additives such as phloroglucinol and alteration in the hormone content
or reduction of sugar or medium salts). It is strongly recommended that
cultures be indexed for microbial contamination on a range of common fungal
and bacteriological media. It may also be beneficial to add inhibitors of phenolic
production and bacterial substrates, such as casein hydrolysate, to the
Stage 1 medium to encourage microbial growth (37).
Meristem culture has long been recognized as an efficient strategy to eliminate
pathogens from plants and, perhaps unknowingly, to eliminate many biotic
contaminants. In general, this is a reliable strategy but there are examples
where, either because the apical explant was too large or because the contaminant/
pathogen was highly invasive of the apical tissue, this approach has not
been successful (12). In these cases, attempts can be made to find escapes, or
the plants can be heat-treated or treated with antibiotics in vivo prior to explantation.
Alternatively, the plants can be heat treated or exposed to antibiotics in
vitro (12,38).
If explants, other than apical meristems are used, care should be taken as
epiphytic bacteria and yeasts may form resistant biofilms, may be protected in
leaf or stem crevices, in damaged hairs or glands or may have entered the plant
opportunistically through wounds and so on, thereby avoiding the action of
surface sterilants. Common problems are the lack of a wetting agent in the
sterilizing solution or breakdown of the active principle (39). Leaf-surface
inhabiting bacterial genera are CCP indicator organisms for failure to establish
contaminant-free (aseptic) cultures (see Fig. 2). They can be identified to genera
by classical plant bacteriological methods; by use of commercial biochemical
test kits in-house or sent for fatty acid profiling or PCR analysis to service
companies (addresses can be found using web search engines such as
yahoo.com).
3. Laboratory Contamination Management
HACCP has been used very effectively in the food industry to control contamination
and is equally applicable in the tissue culture laboratory (6). It is
important when designing tissue culture laboratories, especially commercial
laboratories, to compartmentalize activities so that barriers are in place to prevent
the entry of contamination from the external environment and between
the sterile and nonsterile areas. The staff should receive an adequate training in
aseptic technique and staff hygiene standards should be maintained as in the
food industry. Jewellery and watches should be removed before entering the
clean areas, hair and ears should be covered, overshoes should be worn, and
face masks used. It is particularly important that workers wash their hands/
gloves between shifts. The equipment should be regularly checked to ensure
that the specifications for sterilization and air-cleaning are maintained.Contamination Management 47
Biomarkers for autoclave functioning, the efficiency of laminar-flow cabinets
and laboratory air quality are given in Fig. 2 (6). These are all common
bacteria/yeasts and can be identified by traditional methods or by using biochemical
test kits (Table 1). Growth room air quality can also be determined by
monitoring these microorganisms (40). A high risk in growth rooms is infestation
by micro-arthropods and cultures should be regularly inspected for
microcolony trails which reflect the transmission of bacteria by the microarthropods
as they move about the cultures. All contaminated cultures should
be autoclaved before disposal and care should be taken to avoid storing fungal
cultures which may act as initial sources of infection. The movement of microarthropods
in the growthroom can be slowed by placing (transparent) film on
the culture shelves which prevents the pest dropping down from upper shelves.
Chemical treatments are available but these can be toxic to the plant tissues (4).
It has been known for some time that the cultures can be contaminated by
the laboratory workers as indicated by the presence of human-associated
microorganisms in the cultures. It has also been reported that human pathogens
may be transmitted via plant cultures to infect workers (41). Contamination
with human-associated bacteria can be used to monitor the aseptic technique of
micropropagation workers.
4. Future Trends
It is not surprising that the guidelines for indexing plants in certified stock
production and for international plant movement, rely on traditional methods
as these guidelines are drawn up by committees of representatives of individual
countries and consensus must be obtained before changes can be introduced
that are acceptable as a basis for international plant trade. Nevertheless, European
Union draft legislation approves the use of PCR for indexing for Ralstonia
solanacearum in potato and it is anticipated that the use of “omics” methods
will become more widely approved. There still remains the requirement that
specified in vivo plant tissues be used for indexing. Further studies of the virustiter
of in vitro material may validate the indexing of in vitro cultures for viral
pathogens in the future (16).
There are no restrictions on the use of “omics” methods for pathogen-indexing
of in vitro cultures for non-certification purposes. Here, however, the issues
of sensitivity, specificity and cost arise. Although primers to ITS regions
may allow identification to species or subspecific level there remains the need
to confirm pathogenicity. Where pathovars are distinguished by the production
of specific metabolites (toxins) or proteins (e.g., glucanases and so on) “omics”
methods have the potential to identify them. Where pathogenicity is caused by
quantitative rather than qualitative gene expression this may not be possible
and inoculation indicator plants will still be required. Identification to species/Growth Measurements 51
51
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 318: Plant Cell Culture Protocols, Second Edition
Edited by: V. M. Loyola-Vargas and F. Vázquez-Flota © Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
4
Growth Measurements
Estimation of Cell Division and Cell Expansion
Gregorio Godoy-Hernández and Felipe A. Vázquez-Flota
Summary
The main parameters for the estimation of growth within in vitro cultures are reviewed.
Procedures to measure these parameters are described, emphasizing in each case their convenience
of use, depending on the features of the culture to evaluate.
Key Words: Cell counting; duplication time; dry weight; fresh weight; growth index;
packed cell volume.
1. Introduction
The accurate, fast, and reliable determination of cell growth is of critical
importance in plant cell and tissue culture. The precise assessment of growth
kinetics is essential for the efficient design of bioprocess engineering. However,
the measurement of growth parameters in the different types of cultures,
and concomitantly the use of various containers along with the heterogenity in
cell morphology, introduce diverse problems that must be addressed by using a
specific methodology for each case (1). Because callus and cell suspension
cultures represent two of the most common in vitro systems, this chapter concentrates
in growth measurements in such systems.
1.1. Callus Cultures
Plant cell cultures are initiated through the formation of a mass of
nondifferentiated cells called “callus.” A callus culture is obtained by excising a
piece of tissue, the explant, from the parent plant and placing it onto a nutrient
base, solidified with agar. This nutrient base contains macronutrients (nitrogen,52 Godoy-Hernández and Vázquez-Flota
potassium, phosphorus, and so on), micronutrients (cobalt, copper, iron, and so
on), a carbon source (usually sucrose), and various plant growth regulators.
Callus tissue is not an ideal system to work with, because of their slow growth
rate and high biochemical variability. Nevertheless, because they are an almost
obligatory step to initiate an in vitro culture, the proper assessment of the effect
of different media composition or growth regulators on their growth rate is an
important parameter to define the optimal media to use. The most common
growth parameters used for callus cultures include fresh weight, dry weight,
and growth index.
1.2. Suspension Cultures
The success in the establishment of a cell suspension culture depends, in a
great extent, on the availability of “friable” callus tissue (i.e., a tissue that,
when stirred in liquid medium, rapidly disaggregate into single cells and small
clusters). Such a system is much more amenable for biochemical studies and
process development than calli, because they generally grow in a faster rate
and allow cells to be in direct contact with the medium nutrients. Suspension
or liquid cultures of plant cells are usually grown as microbial cells. However,
plant cell dimensions are larger than those of bacteria or fungi, ranging from
20 to 40 µm in diameter and from 100 to 200 µm in length (2,3). The central
vacuole occupies a large portion of the mature cell volume. Plant cell cultures
tend to contain clumps, formed by a variable number of cells. These clumps
arise as a result of the failure of new cells to separate after division or from the
adherence of free cells among themselves. In some cases, such clumps (also
known as aggregates) may contain up to 200 cells, and reach up to 2 mm in
diameter. Although cell stickiness can be overcome by modifying the culture
medium, cells in culture become “sticky” in late lag phase of growth as a rule.
Methods to obtain suspensions composed largely of free cells (fine-cell suspensions)
include the use of cell wall degrading enzymes and sieving. Unfortunately
once established, a fine cell suspension has a tendency with time to
revert to a clumped condition (4).
1.3 Methods for Evaluating Growth in In Vitro Cultures
There are several methods for evaluating growth kinetics in plant cell cultures.
Selected examples include: fresh cell weight, dry cell weight, settled cell
volume, packed cell volume, cell counting, culture optical density, residual
electrical conductivity, and pH measurements, among others (1).
In cultures originated from different plant species, settled volume, packed
cell volume, as well as fresh weight, all show a very good linear correlation
with dry weight data. Thus, any of these estimations can be used for measuringGrowth Measurements 53
cell growth. However, during the stationary phase of the culture, there are
important deviations in this correlation. At this phase, plant cell cultures show
a high degree of aggregation, cell lysis, and a marked heterogenity in cell morphology.
The measurement of cell concentration by cell counting and turbidity (optical
density) has also shown a reasonably good correlation with the dry-cell
weight parameter. When cultures reached the stationary phase, the same problems
stated above render unsatisfactory results regarding to the correlation of
these parameters to dry weight estimation. On the other hand, protein, RNA
and DNA contents fail to show the same good correlation with the dry weight,
which may be ascribed to changes in cell physiology along the growth cycle,
which frequently results in wide variations.
Although complicated and time consuming, cell counting represents the best
way to assess culture growth in suspension cultures. Nevertheless, it often
shows a good correlation with other parameters, such as electric conductivity.
Cell density is obtained by direct counting of cells under the microscope, using
a cell counting chamber, such as the Sedgewick rafter cell (Graticulates Limited,
Tonbridge England) or the Newbauer chamber (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO). Such devices hold a fixed volume of the suspension over a defined area.
The base of the chamber is divided in squares, frequently containing a 1 mm3
(1 µL) volume. By observing the suspension with a low magnification objective,
cells contained in such a volume are identified and counted.
Electric conductivity of culture medium decreases inversely to biomass gain.
This is a consequence of ion uptake by cells. The monitoring of this decrease to
assess cell growth offers several advantages over other methods, such as: (1)
continuous and in situ or on-line monitoring of cell growth; (2) no sampling or
wet chemical analysis is required; (3) it is economical and efficient; (4) it provides
an accurate, reliable, and reproducible measurement of plant cell growth
rate; and (5) it is independent of cell aggregation, growth morphology, and
apparent viscosity (1).
2. Materials
2.1. Biological Material
1. Callus and cell suspension cultures of any species.
2.2. Glassware
1. Glass desiccators, or any other hermetic container, with silica gel.
2. 50-mL sterile, graduated centrifuge tubes.
3. Counting cell chamber (Sedgewick rafter cell).54 Godoy-Hernández and Vázquez-Flota
2.3. Instrumentation
1. Analytical balance (resolution to 0.01 mg)
2. Top loading balance (resolution 0.1 g)
3. Convection oven (resolution 0.1°C)
4. Conductivity meter (range 0–200 µs and 0–200 µs; resolution 0.1 U)
5. Universal centrifuge (with a speed range including 4000g)
6. Light microscope with ×10 and ×40 objective lenses.
2.4. Chemicals
1. Chromium trioxide (CrO3), 8% solution. Dissolve 8 g of CrO3 in 100 mL of water.
Keep in the dark at room temperature
2. Cellulase from Aspergillus sp., 10% suspension. Dissolve 0.5 g of cellulase
(Sigma Chemical Co, St. Louis, MO) in 5 mL 100 mM potassium phosphate
buffer, pH 6.0. Keep at 4°C. Use suspension within 1 wk.
3. Macerozyme R-10, 5% suspension (Pectinase from Rhizopus). Dissolve 0.25 g of
Macerozyme R-10 (Sigma Chemical Co) in 5 mL 100 mM potassium phosphate
buffer, pH 6.0. Keep at 4°C. Use suspension within 1 wk.
3. Methods
3.1. Measuring Growth in Callus Cultures
3.1.1. Fresh-Weight Determination
1. To determine the total fresh weight, harvest all the tissue on the media surface
with flat-end tweezers and weigh on a balance. To avoid tissue desiccation, open
the culture jar only when you are ready to processes it.
3.1.2. Dry-Weight Determination
1. Dry weight can be estimated by drying the tissue at 60°C in a convection oven,
until of constant weight (usually 16 h). Take a sample of the fresh tissue, weigh it
on a pre-weighed square of aluminum foil, and evaporate the water contained in
the tissue in the pre-heated oven at 60°C for 12 h.
2. Allow samples to cool down in a dessicator containing silica gel for 15–20 min
and then register the sample’s weight.
3. Put the tissue sample back into the oven and take a new weight register after 2 h.
If no variations are detected, samples have reached constant weight. If variations
higher than 10% regarding the previous register are observed, return samples to
the oven for another 2-h period.
4. Alternatively, dry weight can be obtained from lyophilized tissues. Once harvested,
fresh tissues should be weighed, deposited in lyophilizer flasks, and frozen
at –20°C for at least 12 h. Flasks with frozen tissues are then connected to the
vacuum line for 24 h and weight is registered.Growth Measurements 55
3.2. Measuring Growth in Cell Suspension Cultures
Growth of suspension cultures is commonly evaluated as the settled cell
volume (SCV), the packed cell volume (PCV), fresh cell weight (FCW), dry
cell weight (DCW). Indirect evaluations include pH measurements and medium
residual conductivity (mmhos). Finally, parameters describing growth
efficiency, such as specific growth rate (µ), doubling time (dt), and growth
index, can be determined.
3.2.1. Settled Cell Volume and Packed Cell Volume
Both parameters allow the quick estimation of culture growth, while maintaining
sterile conditions. These measurements are useful for monitoring
growth in the same flasks along a culture cycle, because suspensions may be
returned to prior culture conditions. Care must be taken to maintain sterile conditions.
However, volume estimation may not be an accurate way of monitoring
growth, given its dependence on cell morphology (cell and clump size, cell
density, and other).
SCV is determined by allowing a cell suspension to sediment in graduated
tubes. It is reported as the percentage of the total volume of suspension occupied
by the cell mass. The PCV is determined in a similar way, after it has been
compacted by centrifugation.
3.2.1.1. SETTLED CELL VOLUME
1. Pour the cell suspension in a graduated cylinder of adequate volume.
2. Allow the suspension to settle for 30 min and record the cell volume.
3. Take a second reading 30 min later. If the variation between readings is higher
than 5%, record a third measurement after another 30-min wait period.
4. The volume fraction of the suspension occupied by the cells is determined as the
SCV.
3.2.1.2. PACKED CELL VOLUME
1. PCV can be determined by centrifuging 10 mL of the culture in a 15-mL graduated
conical centrifuge tube at 200g for 5 min.
3.2.2. Fresh Cell Weight and Dry Cell Weight
Fresh and dry cell weight represent more precise measurements of cell
growth than the sole culture volume. However, both require the manipulation
of samples in nonsterile conditions. Fresh weight estimation involves less time
than that required for dry weight, but it may not reflect a real measurement of
biomass gain, particularly at the end of the culture period, when most of the
culture growth is because of water uptake (5).
1. Collect the cell mass by filtration, using a Büchner funnel under vacuum.56 Godoy-Hernández and Vázquez-Flota
2. Wash the cell package with about 3 mL distilled water and retain under vacuum
for a fixed time period (e.g., 30 s). Weigh immediately to reduce variations caused
by water evaporation.
3. Fresh and dry weights are determined as described earlier for callus tissue.
3.2.3. Culture Cell Density
In order to obtain a reliable value of the number of cells in a suspension
culture, clusters should be first disaggregated. This can be accomplished by
incubating the suspension with an 8% chromium trioxide solution, or with hydrolytic
enzymes, such as cellulase and pectinase. The chromium trioxide
method is quicker and less complicated than the use of enzymes; however, it
hinders the estimation of cell viability in the same sample. Because a careful
use of enzymes maintains cells viable, the assessment of the number of living
cells by the exclusion of vital stains can be performed in the same sample.
3.2.3.1. CELL CLUSTER DISAGGREGATION BY CHROMIUM TRIOXIDE
1. Take 1 mL of the cell suspension and add 2 mL of 8% chromium trioxide (CrO3).
2. Incubate the mixture for 15 min at 70°C.
3. Vortex the mixture vigorously for 15 min.
3.2.3.2. CELL CLUSTER DISAGGREGATING HYDROLYTIC ENZYMES
1. Take 1 mL of the cell suspension and mix it with 0.5 mL of 10% cellulase and 0.5
mL 5% pectinase.
2. Incubate 30 min at 25°C with rotatory agitation (100 rpm) (see Note 1).
3.2.3.3. CELL COUNTING
1. Fill the counting cell chamber with the mixture, position carefully the cover glass
on top of the chamber, to avoid the formation of bubbles.
2. Observe under the microscope with the ×10 objective to locate the squared field.
3. Count all the cells contained in 10 squares. Add the values of the 10 squares (do
not obtain the average). This number represents the number of cells in 10 µL, so
multiply by 100 to determine the cell number per milliliter (6) (see Note 2).
4. Depending on the culture’s cell density, further dilution may be required, which
should be considered in the calculation.
3.3. Parameters of Growth Efficiency
3.3.1. Growth Index
Both fresh and dry weight are measurements of tissue’s absolute biomass at
a given sampling time. No reference to the actual growth capacity is taken in
consideration. Growth index (GI) is a relative estimation of such capacity as it
correlates the biomass data at the sampling time to that of the initial condition.
It is calculated as the ratio of the accumulated and the initial biomass. TheGrowth Measurements 57
accumulated biomass corresponds to the difference between the final and the
initial masses.
Where GI represents growth index, and WF and W0, represent the final and
initial masses, respectively (either as fresh or dry weight).
3.3.2. Specific Growth Rate
It is generally accepted that growth of a cell culture with respect to time is
best described by the sigmoid curve theory. At the beginning, the cell population
grows relatively slow (lag phase). As the population size approaches onehalf
of the carrying capacity (defined by the nutrient status of the culture
medium), the culture’s growth per time unit increases. The rate of growth is
measured by the steepness of the curve, and it is the steepest when the population
density reaches one-half of the carrying capacity (in the middle of the
sigmoid). After this point, the steepness of the curve decreases, keeping this
tendency as the population increases, until it reaches the carrying capacity (stationary
phase).
The specific growth rate (µ) refers to the steepness of such a curve, and it is
defined as the rate of increase of biomass of a cell population per unit of biomass
concentration. It can be calculated in batch cultures, since during a
defined period of time, the rate of increase in biomass per unit of biomass
concentration is constant and measurable. This period of time occurs between
the lag and stationary phases. During this period, the increase in the cell population
fits a straight-line equation (6):
Where xo is the initial biomass (or cell density), x is the biomass (or cell density)
at time t, and µ is the specific growth rate.
3.3.3. Doubling Time
Doubling time (dt) is the time required for the concentration of biomass of a
population of cells to double. One of the greatest contrasts between the growth
of cultured plant cells and microorganisms refers to their respective growth
rates. Although the pattern of growth may be the same, plant cells have dou-
GI F
0
= W -W
W
0
ln x = µt + ln x0
µ = ln x - ln x0
t58 Godoy-Hernández and Vázquez-Flota
bling times or division rates measured in days, while this parameter in many
microorganisms is in the order of minutes to hours. One of the fastest (and
quite exceptional) doubling time recorded for a plant cell culture is 15 h for
tobacco cells (2). The doubling time (dt) can be calculated according to the
following equation (6):
Where µ represents the specific growth rate.
4. Notes
1. The conductivity of the culture medium can be determined using a digital conductivity
meter or equivalent.
2. A very good linear correlation between the decrease in conductivity and the
increase in dry weight can be found.
References
1. Ryu, D. D. Y., Lee, S. O., and Romani, R. J. (1990) Determination of growth rate
for plant cell cultures: comparative studies. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 35, 305–311.
2. Fowler, M. W. (1987) Products from plant cells, in Basic Biotechnology (Bu’lok,
J. and Kristiansen, B., eds.), Academic Press, London, pp 525–544.
3. Su, W. W. (1995) Bioprocessing technology for plant cell suspension cultures.
Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 50, 189–230.
4. Fowler, M. W. (1982) The large scale cultivation of plant cells, in Progress in Industrial
Microbiology, Vol 16. (Bull, M. J., ed.), Elsevier, Amsterdan, pp. 207–229.
5. Trejo-Tapia, G., Arias-Castro, C., and Rodríguez-Mendiola, M. (2003) Influence
of the culture medium constituents and inoculum size on the accumulation of blue
pigment and cell growth of Lavandula spica. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 72, 7–12.
6. King, P. J. and Street, H. E. (1977) Growth patterns in cell cultures, in Botanical
Monographs, Vol 11: Plant Tissue and Cell Culture (Street, H. E., ed.),
Blackwell, Oxford.
7. Ramage, C. M. and Williams, R. R. (2002) Mineral nutrition and plant morphogenesis.
In Vitro Cell Dev. Biol., Plant 38 , 116–124.
dt = ln 2
µCallus and Suspension Culture 59
59
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 318: Plant Cell Culture Protocols, Second Edition
Edited by: V. M. Loyola-Vargas and F. Vázquez-Flota © Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
5
Callus and Suspension Culture Induction, Maintenance,
and Characterization
Alejandrina Robledo-Paz, María Nélida Vázquez-Sánchez,
Rosa María Adame-Alvarez, and Alba Estela Jofre-Garfias
Summary
Callus and cell suspension can be used for long-term cell cultures maintenance. This chapter
describes procedures for the induction of somatic embryos of garlic, keeping a regeneration
capacity for more than 5 yr, as well as the maintenance of a tobacco suspension culture (NT-1
cells), for more than 10 yr. Methods for plant regeneration and growth kinetics of garlic cultures
are described, as well as for cell viability of NT-1 cells stained with 2,3,5
triphenyltetrazolium chloride. The packed cell volume determination as a parameter of growth
is detailed.
Key Words: Allium sativum; callus cultures; garlic; somatic embryogenesis; suspension
cultures.
1. Introduction
Plant tissue cultures involve a series of aseptic techniques that allow for the
production of whole regenerated plants or the induction and maintenance of
proliferating undifferentiated masses of cells called callus. These kinds of cultures
are initiated by placing the appropriate type of explant onto a nutrient
medium in vitro.
In 1957, Skoog and Miller (1) demonstrated the effect of auxins and cytokinins
on the induction of different responses of tobacco pith tissue. It was established
that a low concentration of auxins in combination with a high
concentration of a cytokinin-induced shoot development and that a high concentration
of auxins combined with a low concentration of cytokinin yielded
root formation. After these experiments, there were many examples of mor60 Robledo-Paz et al.
phogenetic responses of in vitro cultures, including callus induction. Plant suspension
cultures, in which undifferentiated cells grow in liquid medium, have
been used in biochemical research, for cell physiology, growth, metabolism,
molecular biology, genetic engineering experiments, or for medium or largescale
secondary metabolite and other substance production.
As starting plant material (explant), very diverse parts of a plant can be
used. The selection will depend on the particular species that is employed and
the kind of response that is desired. Among the type of explants frequently
used are leaf portions, isolated meristems, hypocotyls, and root segments,
among others. In short, any part of the plant that is able to respond to the culture
medium and the growing conditions can be used.
For the initiation of the culture three important considerations should be
taken into account: (1) explant selection, (2) election of a suitable culture
medium, and (3) appropriate environmental conditions for its development.
In this chapter callus induction and maintenance, plant regeneration of garlic,
and the long-term maintenance of a tobacco suspension cell line will be
described.
2. Materials
2.1. Garlic (Allium sativum L.) Somatic Embryogenesis Induction
2.1.1. Plant Material
1. Disease- and pest-free garlic cloves from different garlic cultivars.
2.1.2. Laboratory Materials and Equipment
1. Laminar flow cabinets.
2. Bunsen burner.
3. Dissecting forceps and scalpel.
4. Sterile Petri dishes 15 × 100 mm.
5. Beakers.
6. Cylinders.
7. 100- and 250-mL bottles.
8. Aluminum foil.
9. Parafilm.
10. Stereo microscope.
11. Tissue culture incubator at 22°C and 16 h photoperiod.
12. Autoclave.Callus and Suspension Culture 61
13. pH meter.
14. Analytical balance.
15. Stirrer with hot plate.
2.1.3. Reagents, Solutions, and Culture Media
1. Sterile distilled water.
2. Ridomil bravo: 9% metalaxyl, 72% cloratonyl.
3. Benlate (benomyl 50%).
4. Agrimicin 100 (streptomycin 18.7%, oxytetracycline 2%).
5. Commercial laundry bleach (e.g., Clorox®) with 6% of active chlorine.
6. Tween-20.
7. Fungicide and bactericide solution: for each cultivar prepare 500 mL of the fungicide
solution. To 300 mL distilled water add the following compounds: 3 g/L
ridomil bravo; 1.2 g/L benlate, and 1.0 g/L agrimicyn. Mix well until homogeneous
suspension is obtained and bring volume to 500 mL.
8. Chlorine solution: prepare 500 mL of solution for each cultivar. To 300 mL of
distilled water add 150 mL of bleach (final concentration is 1.8% of active chlorine)
add 4 mL of Tween-20 and bring volume to 500 mL.
9. Culture media: specific media used for all steps, from sprouting of garlic cloves
to plant regeneration, are described in Table 1. Mix all ingredients needed for
each culture medium. Adjust the pH to 5.7 with 1.0N KOH. Add agar and sterilize
in autoclave at 1.1 kg/cm2 at 121°C for 20 min. Pour 30 mL of medium into
15 × 100-mm Petri dishes. Media B, C, and D are based on N6 salts (2) supplemented
with Eriksson vitamins (3). Media E and F are based on on the Murashige
and Skoog (MS) medium (4).
2.2. NT-1 Tobacco Cell Suspension
2.2.1. Reagents and Culture Medium
1. Culture medium: NT-1 medium based on MS salts supplemented with 180 mg/L
KH2PO4, 100 mg/L inositol, 1 mg/L thiamine, 2 mg/L 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic
acid (2,4-D), and 30 g/L sucrose. Adjust pH to 5.7 with 1.0N KOH and sterilize
in autoclave at 1.1 kg/cm2 at 121°C for 20 min.
2. 0.05 M Phosphate buffer: dissolve 3.403 g of KH2PO4 in about 400 mL of distilled
water. Adjust pH to 5.8 with KOH, and bring the volume to 500 mL.
3. 2,3,5-Triphenyltetrazolium chloride solution: dissolve 1 g of 2,3,5-
Triphenyltetrazolium chloride in 100 mL of 0.5 M phosphate buffer, filter, sterilize,
and store at 4°C in the dark.Callus and Suspension Culture 63
2.2.2. Laboratory Materials and Equipment
1. Orbital shaker.
2. Culture room at 25°C.
3. Clinical centrifuge.
4. Microcentrifuge.
5. Optical microscope.
6. Adjustable micropipets.
7. 10-mL Sterile transfer pipets with wide mouth.
8. 250-mL Erlenmeyer flasks.
9. 15-mL Centrifuge tubes.
10. 1.5-mL Microcentrifuge tubes.
11. Aluminum foil.
3. Methods
3.1. Garlic Callus Induction
3.1.1. Clove Disinfestation
Selection and prepare the vegetative material: garlic cloves to be used should
not be dormant. Freshly harvested cloves are under dormancy and will not
respond to the culture medium for the establishment of an in vitro culture. A
method to estimate the dormancy degree of cloves at a certain time is to cut
them longitudinally. The first leaf should be evident (see Fig. 1) and if this leaf
occupies more than 50% of the length of the clove it is suitable for use in the
callus induction procedure. If this degree is not achieved then the cloves must
be brought out of dormancy stage. To do so, cloves should be maintained at
4°C for 4–5 wk. Once the first leaf is in the appropriate developmental stage
the cloves are selected by their size. It is very important that the basal portion
(from which roots are formed) do not present any evidence of damage because
initial explants are generated from this part of the clove (5).
Selected cloves are detached from the bulb, manually peeled, and placed
into a beaker where the fungicide-antibiotic solution is added to them. The
beaker is capped with aluminum foil to prevent fermentation and left at room
temperature for 18 h. After 18 h transfer the garlic cloves to the chlorine solution
for 20 min and, finally, rinse three to four times with sterile distilled water.
3.1.2. Callus Initiation and Maintenance
Each garlic clove is placed vertically, with the basal part in the culture medium,
in 100-mL bottles with 20 mL of medium A, and incubated in a culture
chamber at 20°C for a photoperiod of 16 h of light from white fluorescent
lamps at 50 µmol/m2·s.64 Robledo-Paz et al.
Roots should emerge after 3 d of incubation. The apical portion of each root,
about 3-mm long, is dissected in a laminar flow cabinet using a sterile scalpel
and forceps (see Note 1).
Twenty apical tips are placed horizontally on each Petri dish containing 30
mL of culture medium B or C. Dishes are sealed with Parafilm and maintained
in a culture incubator at 22°C in darkness for 4 wk.
At the end of this period cultures are transferred to fresh medium B or C and
are grown, under the same incubation conditions, for an additional 4 wk (see
Fig. 2A). At this time it is possible to observe callus formation in the meristematic
region of the root tip.
With the purpose of increasing the amount of callus formed, explants could
be sub-cultured to fresh B or C medium at intervals of 4 wk. It is important to
note that it is possible to obtain a larger callus mass if explants are maintained
for 2 wk in medium D. This type of calli growing can be maintained indefinitely
if they are transferred to fresh medium B or C at 4-wk intervals.
3.1.3. Plant Regeneration
If plant regeneration is desired, calli can be transferred to 100-mL bottles
with 25 mL of medium D, and maintained at 22°C under a 16 h light photope-
Fig. 1. Diagram of a longitudinal cut of a garlic clove showing the first foliar leaf,
the storage leaf, and the basal plate from which roots emerge.66 Robledo-Paz et al.
riod, at 50 µmol/m2·s. After 3 wk in this medium, small somatic embryos are
developed in the surface of those calli (see Fig. 2B).
Further growth of these embryos is obtained when they are transferred to
250-mL bottles with 30 mL of medium E, and maintained under the same incubation
conditions of light and temperature as before (see Fig. 2C). Small bulbs
initiate and develop from these calli (see Fig. 2D) and roots start to emerge 4–
6 wk later (see Fig. 2E and Note 2).
Because it is difficult to know a priori which explants will develop embryogenic
calli, it is recommended to make a selection using a stereo microscope,
to ensure selection of calli with the morphogenetic capacity to regenerate. Calli
obtained in medium B or C have a high multiplication rate, are very easily
disaggregated, and very friable.
To propagate the type of calli that allows plant regeneration it is necessary
to sub-culture them onto medium B or C, at 3–4 wk intervals, and maintain
them in the dark at 22°C. Under these conditions this kind of calli can be maintained
indefinitely. For garlic it is recommended that when cultures have been
transferred more than two times, and are under a very active division, that calli
should be sub-divided to more Petri dishes to avoid competition for the nutrients
in the medium.
3.1.4. Growth Kinetics of Garlic Calli
It is important to know the rate of growth of a particular kind of callus. This
information allows us to better manage the callus during the multiplication,
somatic embryo induction, and plant regeneration steps.
In order to do this, 500 or 700 mg of fresh weight calli are placed into Petri
dishes with 30 mL of medium B or C. Dishes are sealed and maintained in the
dark at 22°C. Every week these calli are transferred to new dishes of known
weight. The dishes are weighed again, after transferring the calli, to calculate
the callus weight. This procedure is repeated for 4 wk. A growth curve is generated
with the obtained data.
In the case of garlic, culturing calli in medium B or C, at 1-wk intervals,
duplicates their original weight in approx 3 wk (Table 2). These calli are able
to preserve their capacity to increase their biomass, as well as their capacity to
regenerate embryos for up to 6 yr if they are sub-cultivated to fresh medium at
4-wk intervals and are kept in the dark (see Note 3). Even if the growth differences
observed in medium B or C sub-cultured calli are very low at wk 4, the
accumulation of medium C fresh weight calli is still considerably higher than
that obtained in medium B.Callus and Suspension Culture 67
It is important to note that garlic calli are very sensitive to higher temperatures.
The growth rate and the capacity to regenerate embryos decreases if incubation
temperatures rise higher than 22°C. The optimum temperatures are
therefore between 20 and 22°C. The culture described here has been in culture
for more than 5 yr.
3.2. Long-Term Maintenance of NT-1 Cell Culture of Tobacco
This culture has been maintained in our laboratory for more than 13 yr, after
it was transferred to us in 1991. It is sub-cultured every week to fresh culture
medium and incubated at 25°C in the dark in a orbital shaker at 110 rpm, as
described by Paszty and Lurquin in 1987 (6).
Five millilitres of a 1-wk-old culture are transferred with a 10-mL pipet to
an Erlenmeyer flask containing 75 mL of NT-1 medium (see Note 4). The
flask is covered with aluminium foil to avoid exposure to light.
NT-1 cell culture is a very useful culture for transient expression, using
the biolistic method, in experiments in which the activity of a promoter is to
be determined. Results are obtained within 1–2 d after bombardments (see
Note 5) (7).
3.2.1. Packed Cell Volume
One form to estimate the rate of growth of a culture is to determine the
packed cell volume (PCV). In order to do this, transfer 10 mL of the suspension
culture to a 15-mL graduated centrifuge tube. Spin it down in a clinical
centrifuge at 200g over 5 min. PCV is the volume of the pellet and is expressed
as a percentage of the volume of the culture used (see Note 6). This parameter
Table 2
Garlic Cultivar GT96-1 Calli Response to Weekly Subcultures
to Medium B or C
Time in weeks
Medium 0 1 2 3 4
B 0.5a 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.4
0%b 40.0% 80.0% 120.0% 180.0%
C 0.7a 0.9 1.2 1.5 2.2
0%b 28.5% 71.4% 114.2% 214.3%
aFresh weight in g.
bCumulative fresh weight in %.68 Robledo-Paz et al.
is determined daily, starting 1 d after the cells are transferred to the fresh
medium and ending on d 7. Results are presented in Table 3. It is observed that
at the beginning of transfer (1–3 d), there is a lag phase during which the division
of the suspension culture is very low. Following this period a log phase is
observed, and at d 7 the culture is still in this growing phase.
3.2.2. Cell Viability
One procedure to estimate the viability of the cultures is the use of 2,3,5-
triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) (8).
Transfer 500 µL of cultures from d 1 and 4 or 250 µL of the culture from d
7 into microcentrifuge tubes. Spin down for 1 min at 9500g, eliminate supernatant,
and add 1 mL of TTC solution. Incubate at room temperature for 12–20 h
in the dark, and observe under a compound microscope.
Living cells reduce the reagent to an insoluble red formazan precipitate because
of mitochondrial activity (see Note 7).
In Fig. 3 stained cells from cultured NT-1 cells are shown at 1, 4, and 7 d
after transfer to fresh medium. Cells from 1-d-old culture show a good staining
(notice that some cells are not stained). Cells from a 4-d-old culture show a
staining that is more intense than the other incubation periods.
4. Notes
1. Roots start to emerge at d 3 after cloves are put on medium A to sprout. New and
useful roots emerge 1 wk later. It is possible to obtain more explants from a clove.
2. Regenerated plants can be transferred to soil. They have to be conditioned to the
environment in a growth chamber at 22°C and subjected to a photoperiod of 16 h
light at 50 µmol/m2·s. This step is achieved in 7–10 d and plants are ready to be
transferred to a greenhouse where they reach maturity.
3. Cultures described here were initiated 6 yr ago and still have the capacity to regenerate
plants which can be transferred to soil and reach maturity in the greenhouse.
Table 3
Packed Cell Volume
Days after subculture PCV (v/v%)
1 4.0
2 5.0
3 6.0
4 10.0
5 15.0
6 30.0
7 40.0Callus and Suspension Culture 69
4. Pipets used to transfer NT-1 cell must have a wide tip so that the small clumps of
cells, formed during the culture, are able to pass through.
5. Even if this suspension culture has lost the capacity to regenerate plants, it does
has some advantages, such as its relative uniformity and its rapid rate of growth.
Bombardment conditions should be standardized so that differences between the
strength of promoters could be observed.
6. It is important to get the readings of pellet volumes soon after centrifugation,
because cells start to swell if tubes are let to stand for long periods, resulting in
overestimation PCV.
7. In this case the technique of Nomarski (differential interference contrast) was
used to improve the images obtained in the microscope.
Acknowledgments
The authors want to thank Laura Silva-Rosales for her critical review of the
manuscript and Andres Estrada and Marcelina Garcia for their technical assistance
in the TTC staining and observations.
References
1. Skoog, F. and Miller, C. O. (1957) Chemical regulation of growth and organ formation
in plant tissues cultured in vitro. Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol. 11, 118–130.
2. Chu, C. C., Wang, C. C., Sun, S. C., et al. (1975) Establishment of an efficient
medium for anther culture of rice through comparative experiments on the nitrogen
sources. Sci. Sin. 18, 659–688.
Fig. 3. Staining of NT-1 tobacco suspension cultures at different stages of incubation
with TTC. (A,D) Stained cells from 1-d-old cultures. (B,E) Cell from 4-d-old
cultures. (C,F) Cells from 7-d-old cultures. Bar in A, B, and C = 100 mm; bar in D, E,
and F = 50 mm.70 Robledo-Paz et al.
3. Eriksson, T. (1965) Studies on the growth requirements and growth measurements
of cell cultures of Haplopappus gracilis. Physiologia Plantarum. 18, 976–993.
4. Murashige, T. and Skoog, F. (1962) A revised medium for rapid growth and bioassays
with tobacco tissue cultures. Physiologia Plantarum. 15, 473–497.
5. Argüello, J. A., Bottini, R., Luna, R., de Bottini, G. A., and Racca, R. W. (1983)
Dormancy in garlic (Alliun sativum L.) cv Rosado Paraguayo I. Levels of growth
substances in “seed cloves” under storage. Plant Cell Physiol. 24, 1559–1563.
6. Paszty, C. and Lurquin, P. F. (1987) Improved Plant Protoplast Plating/Selection
Technique for Quantitation of Transformation. BioTechniques. 5, 716–718.
7. Russel, J. A., Rory, M. K., and Sanford, J. C. (1992) Major improvements in
biolistic transformation of suspension-cultured tobacco cells. In Vitro Cell. Dev.
Biol. 28P, 97–105.
8. Towill, L. E. and Mazur, P. (1975) Studies on the reduction of 2,3,5-
triphenyltretrazolim chloride as a viability assay for plant tissue cultures. Can. J.
Bot. 53, 1097–1102.Measurement of Cell Viability 71
71
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 318: Plant Cell Culture Protocols, Second Edition
Edited by: V. M. Loyola-Vargas and F. Vázquez-Flota © Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
6
Measurement of Cell Viability in In Vitro Cultures
Lizbeth A. Castro-Concha, Rosa María Escobedo,
and María de Lourdes Miranda-Ham
Summary
An overview of the methods for assessing cell viability in in vitro cultures is presented. The
protocols of four of the most commonly used assays are described in detail, so the readers may
be able to determine which assay is suitable for their own projects using plant cell cultures.
Key Words: Cell viability; Evans blue; fluorescein diacetate; MTT; TTC; tetrazolium salts.
1. Introduction
Plant cell cultures have been widely used as model systems for biochemical
and physiological studies, and also in some biotechnological processes, such
as cell permeabilization, cell immobilization, or cell cultivation in bioreactors
(1). Therefore, the accurate assessment of the number of viable cells in a population
is very important to prevent the inclusion of low viable or dead cells in
the calculations of results per cell or on a fresh weight basis or to indicate the
maximal attainable cell density in production processes.
A cell is considered viable if it has the ability to grow and develop (2,3).
Viability assays are based on either the physical properties of viable cells, such
as membrane integrity or cytoplasmic streaming, or on their metabolic activity,
such as reduction of tetrazolium salts or hydrolysis of fluorogenic
susbtrates. To assess cell membrane integrity, dyes such as Evans blue (EB
[4,5]), methylene blue (6), Trypan blue (7), neutral red (8), and phenosaphranin
(9) have been used. These compounds leak through the ruptured membranes
and stain the contents of dead cells and then, are accounted for via microscopic
observation or spectrometric estimation.72 Castro-Concha, Escobedo, and Miranda-Ham
Other methods rely on the measurement of the activity of enzymes, such as
reductases and esterases. In the case of reductases, both, MTT (3-[4,5-
dimethylthiazol-2yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide) and TTC (2,3,5-
triphenyl tetrazolium chloride), accept electrons from the electron transport chain
of the mitochondria; as a result, these molecules are converted to insoluble
formazan within viable cells with fully active mitochondria (10). On the other
hand, intracellular esterases hydrolyze a fluorogenic substrate (fluorescein
diacetate), that can pass through the cell membrane, whereupon they cleave off
the diacetate group producing the highly fluorescent product fluorescein. Fluorescein
will accumulate in cells, which possess intact membranes, so the green
fluorescence can be used as a marker of cell viability (11). An alternative method
to measure the activity of esterases is the use of two-dimensional fluorescence
spectroscopy, which eliminates the time-consuming, and often difficult, counting
of viable and nonviable cells under the miscroscope (1).
Cell death is an important feature to monitor during plant–pathogen interactions,
so it must be measured accurately for the proper appraisal of the cellular
responses. There have been contradictory reports of the measured cell viability
in elicited cell suspension cultures (12–14). Hence, we have analyzed the elicitor
induced cell viability changes in a tomato cell suspension using different
methods. The use of the reduction of tetrazolium salts is proposed as a better
indicator of metabolically active cells during the early hours of fungal elicitation
(15).
2. Materials
2.1. Cell Suspension Cultures
Calli were induced from young leaves of Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.
Var. Río Grande on media with Murashige and Skoog (MS) salts (16) and
supplemented with B5 vitamins (17), 3% (w/v) sucrose, 2.24 µM 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic
acid, 0.049 µMkinetin, and 0.22% (w/v) gelrite, pH 5.8. They
were incubated in the dark at 25°C and subcultured every 3 wk. Friable calli
were transferred into 50 mL liquid medium (as previous, without gelrite) with
orbital shaking (100 rpm). The cell suspensions were subcultured every 7 d by
1:5 dilution with fresh media. In order to observe an adequate response to the
elicitor treatments, the number of cells in the suspension cultures was adjusted
to 2.5 × 106 cells per milliliter (see Note 1).
2.2. MTT/TTC Assay
1. MTT stock solution: dissolve 50 mg in 10 mL sterile 50 mM phosphate buffer,
pH 7.5 and store in the dark at 4°C.
2. TTC stock solution: dissolve 0.2 g in 10 mL sterile 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH
7.5 and store in the dark at 4°C.Measurement of Cell Viability 73
3. Sterile 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5.
4. 50% (v/v) methanol, containing 1% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS).
2.3. Evans Blue Assay
1. EB stock solution: dissolve 100 mg in 10 mL sterile water and store in the dark at 4°C.
2. 50% (v/v) methanol, containing 1% (w/v) SDS.
2.4. Fluorescein Diacetate Assay
1. Fluorescein Diacetate (FDA) stock solution: dissolve 25 mg of fluorescein
diacetate in acetone. Preserve the solution in an amber bottle at –20°C.
2. 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5.
3. Methods
3.1. Maintenance of L. esculentum Cultures
Cells should be subcultured every 7 d as follows: in laminar flow cabinet,
add 10 mL of a 7-d-old suspension culture to 40 mL of fresh medium in a 250-
mL Erlenmeyer flask. Close the flasks and return to the growing conditions
stated before. By repeating the above process, cell cultures can be maintained
indefinitely.
3.2. MTT/ TTC Assay
1. Wash aseptically cell suspension samples (1 mL) with 50 mM phosphate buffer,
pH 7.5. Repeat twice (see Note 1).
2. Resuspend the cells in 1 mL of the same buffer.
3. Add MTT or TTC to a final concentration of 1.25 or 2.5 mM, respectively.
4. Incubate samples for 8 h in the dark at 25°C.
5. Solubilize formazan salts with 1.5 mL 50% methanol, containing 1% SDS, at
60°C for a period of 30 min.
6. Centrifuge at 1875g for 5 min and recover the supernatant.
7. Repeat steps 5 and 6. Pool the supernatants.
8. Quantify absorbance at 570 nm for MTT and 485 nm for TTC (see Note 2).
3.3. Evans Blue Assay
1. Add Evans Blue (EB) stock solution to cell suspension samples (1 mL) to a final
concentration of 0.025% (v/v).
2. Incubate for 15 min at room temperature.
3. Wash extensively with distilled water to remove excess and unbound dye.
4. Solubilize dye bound to dead cells in 50% (v/v) methanol with 1% (w/v) SDS at
60°C for 30 min. Repeat twice and pool the supernatants.
5. Centrifuge at 1875g for 15 min.
6. Dilute the supernatant to a final volume of 7 mL.
7. Quantify absorbance at 600 nm (see Note 2).74 Castro-Concha, Escobedo, and Miranda-Ham
3.4. FDA Assay
1. Mix cell samples (1 mL) with 10 µL of FDA stock solution.
2. Incubate for 15 min at room temperature in the dark.
3. Adjust the volume to 4 mL with distilled water.
4. Centrifuge at 1875g for 5 min.
5. Resuspend the pellet in 1 mL 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5.
6. Freeze quickly in liquid nitrogen.
7. Thaw and dilute samples to 3 mL with phosphate buffer.
8. Homogenize with a Brinkman polytron at high speed for 10 s.
9. Centrifuge at 1875g for 20 min.
10. Dilute a 100 µL sample of the supernatant to a final volume of 2 mL.
11. Determine fluorescence at 516 nm, using a 492 nm excitation beam (see Note 2).
3.5. Microscopic Assay
1. Stain cell samples with FDA by mixing the samples (1 mL) with 10 µL of the
stock solution.
2. Incubate for 15 min at room temperature in the dark.
3. Wash with 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5.
4. Centrifuge at 1875g for 5 min.
5. Resuspend in phosphate buffer (1 mL).
6. Counterstain with EB, following steps 1–5 but using 10 µL of the EB stock
solution.
7. Determine the number of blue dead cells under a bright field and yellow-green
fluorescent viable cells under ultraviolet light (excitation: BP 450-490 nm and
emission: LP 520 nm) in an Axioplan microscope in 10 randomized fields in a
Sedgewick chamber.
4. Notes
1. Cell densities were determined by the chromium trioxide method. Briefly, 1-mL
samples were taken at the indicated time and mixed thoroughly with 2 mL of 8%
(w/v) chromium trioxide. Then, they were incubated for 15 min at 80°C. One
milliliter samples were loaded on a Sedgewick Rafter counting cell chamber
(London), which holds 100 mm3 and 10 randomized fields were counted twice
per slide under bright light microscopy (×10). The mean and standard deviation
of cell density values were calculated.
2. There was a robust correlation between enzyme activities and the number of viable
cells employed in each assay (MTT, r2 = 0.995; TTC, r2 = 0.989; EB, r2 =
0.979; FDA, r2 = 0.996) and an internal control of heat-killed cells was used to
estimate the percentages of relative viability (r2 = 0.998).Cryopreservation of Cell Suspensions 77
77
From: Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 318: Plant Cell Culture Protocols, Second Edition
Edited by: V. M. Loyola-Vargas and F. Vázquez-Flota © Humana Press Inc., Totowa, NJ
7
Cryopreservation of Embryogenic Cell Suspensions
by Encapsulation-Vitrification
Qiaochun Wang and Avihai Perl
Summary
Encapsulation-vitrification, which is a combination of encapsulation-dehydration and vitrification
procedures, is a newly developed technique for cryopreservation of plant germoplasm.
Here, we describe the protocol of this methodology, using grapevine (Vitis) as a model plant.
Cell suspensions at the exponential growth stage were encapsulated with 2.5% sodium alginate
solution in 0.1 M calcium chloride solution for 20 min to form beads of about 4 mm in diameter
containing 25% cells. The beads were stepwise precultured in increasing sucrose concentrations
of 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 M for 3 yr, with 1 d for each step. Precultured beads were treated
with a loading solution for 60 min at room temperature and then dehydrated with PVS2 at 0°C
for 270 min, followed by direct immersion in liquid nitrogen for 1 h. The beads were rapidly
rewarmed at 40°C in a water bath for 3 min and then diluted with 1 M sucorse solution at room
temperature for 30 min. Rewarmed, washed beads were post-cultured on a recovery medium
for 3 d at 25°C in the dark for survival. Surviving cells were transferred to a regrowth medium
to induce cell proliferation. Embryogenic cell suspensions were re-established by suspending
the cells in a cell suspension maintenance medium maintained on a gyratory shaker at 25°C in
the dark. For plant regeneration, surviving cells were transferred from the recovery medium to
an embryo maturation medium and maintained at 25°C under light conditions. Embryos at the
torpedo stage were cultured on rooting medium until whole plantlet was developed.
Key Words: Cell suspensions; cryopreservation; embryogenesis; encapsulation; liquid nitrogen;
plant regeneration; vitrification.
1. Introduction
Embryogenic cell suspensions have widely been used as an efficient system
for plant clonal micropropagation and as target tissues for genetic manipulation
in many transformation systems (1). However, the competence for
embryogenesis usually declines or totally loses and somatic variation may occur78 Wang and Perl
in such cell suspension cultures with an increase in subculture time (2). Moreover,
establishment of fresh embryogenic cultures is season-dependent, laborious,
and time-consuming. Cryopreservation has been considered as an ideal
means for avoiding loss of embryogenic potential and preventing the occurrence
of somaclonal variation: all cell divisions and other metabolic processes of plant
materials that are stored in this way cease. Theoretically, plant materials can
thus be stored without any changes for an indefinite period of time (3).
Encapsulation-vitrification, which is a combination of encapsulationdehydration
and vitrification procedures, is one of several newly developed
techniques for cryopreservation of plant germplasm. In comparison with classical
techniques, such as slow cooling, encapsulation-vitrification enables cells
to be cryopreserved by direct immersion in liquid nitrogen, thus avoiding the
use of a sophisticated and expensive programmable freezer (3). Vitrification
refers to the physical process by which a highly concentrated cryoprotective
solution is supercooled at very low temperatures and eventually solidifies into
a metastable glass without undergoing crytallization at a glass transition temperature
(4). Thus, vitrified cells evade the danger of intracellular freezing and
survive freezing in liquid nitrogen. Encapsulation of the cells, normally in 2–3%
calcium-alginate beads, can protect the specimens during the procedure and
reduce the chemcial toxicity or osmotic stress of the vitrification solution. In
addition, encapsulation-vitrification is much easier to handle and allows for
treatment of a large number of samples at the same time in comparison to the
vitrification procedure alone.
Encapsulation-vitrification was originally developed by Tannoury et al. (5)
for cryopreservation of carnation apices (Dianthus caryophyllus L.). In this
protocol, encapsulated apices were precultured for 16 h in progressively more
concentrated sucrose medium, then incubated for 6 h in a vitrification solution
containing ethylene glycol and sucrose, and finally frozen either rapidly or
slowly. Survival of cryopreserved apices reached 100 and 92% after rapid and
slow freezing, respectively.
Using encapsulation-vitrification procedure, much higher recovery was produced
in cryopreserved shoot tips of wasabi (Wasabia japonica) (6) and strawberry
(Fragaria  ananassa Duch.) (7) compared with encapsulationdehydration.
Wang et al. (8) demonstrated that encapsulation-vitrification was
much more applicable to different grapevine (Vitis) species and cultivars than
encapsulation-dehydration. Therefore, encapsulation-vitrification would have a
great potential for broad applications to cell suspensions (3,8).Cryopreservation of Cell Suspensions 79
2. Materials
2.1. General Requirements
1. Standard tissue culture facilities.
2. 2-mL Cryogenic vial.
3. 250-mL Erlenmeyer flask.
4. Gyratory shaker.
5 1-mL Pipet.
6. Sterile disposable 25-mL pipet.
7. 20- to 35-L Taylor-Wharton Dewar flask (beaker style wide-mouth).
8. Magenta GA7 vessels.
9. 9-cm Whatmann paper.
10. 9-cm Petri dish.
2.2. Chemicals, Plant Growth Regulators, and Media
1. Activated charcoal (AC, cat. no. C 9157).
2. Calcium chloride (Sigma, cat. no. C 4901).
3. Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (Sigma, cat. no. D 8418).
4. Ethylene glycol (Sigma, cat. no. E 9129).
5. Gelrite (Sigma, cat. no. G 1910).
6. Glycerol (Sigma, cat. no. G 5516).
7. Naphthalene acetic acid (NAA) (Sigma, cat. no. N 0640).
8. 2-Naphthoxyacetic acid (NOA) (Sigma, cat. no. N 3019).
9. Nitsch and Nitsch medium (NN) (9) (Duchefa, cat. no. N 0224).
10. Sodium alginate (Sigma, cat. no. A 2158).
11. Sucrose (Sigma, cat. no. S 7903).
12. Woody plant medium (WPM) (10) (Duchefa, cat. no. M 0220).
2.3. Media and Solutions
1. 0.1 M calcium chloride solution: liquid NN medium containing 0.1 M calcium
chloride, 2 M glycerol, and 0.4 M sucrose, pH 5.8.
2. Cell suspension maintenance medium: liquid NN medium supplemented with 18
g/L maltose, 1 g/L casein enzymatic hydrolysate, 4.6 g/L glycerol, and 1 mg/L
NOA, pH 5.8.
3. Dilution medium: liquid NN medium containing 1 M sucrose, pH 5.8.
4. Embryo maturation medium: solid NN medium supplemented with 18 g/L maltose,
1 g/L casein enzymatic hydrolysate, 4.6 g/L glycerol, and 2.6 g/L gelrite, pH 5.8.
5. Loading solution: liquid NN containing 2 M glycerol and 0.4 M sucrose, pH 5.8.
6. Plant vitrification solution (PVS2): 0.4 M sucrose, 30% (w/v) glycerol, 15%
(w/v) DMSO and 15% (w/v) ethylene glycol made up in liquid NN medium,
pH 5.8 (11).80 Wang and Perl
7. Preculture medium: cell suspension maintanence supplemented with 0.25, 0.5, or
0.75 M sucrose, respectively, pH 5.8.
8. Recovery medium: cell suspension maintanence containing 2.5 g/L AC and
solidified with 2.6 g/L gelrite, pH 5.8.
9. Rooting medium: solid WPM containing 30 g/L sucrose, 1 mg/L NAA, 2.5 g/L
AC, and 2.6 g/L gelrite, pH 5.8.
10. Sodium alginate solution: 0.4 M sucrose, 2 M glycerol, and 2.5% (w/v) sodium
alginate made up in liquid NN medium, pH 5.8.
3. Methods
As with any method, optimal treatment parameters at each step during the
whole procedure may vary greatly with different plant species and even cultivars.
In this section, we make every effort to illustrate the protocol, using grapevine
(Vitis) as an example. The method, described in Subheadings 3.1.–3.5.
consists of (1) maintenance of embryogenic cell suspensions, (2) encapsulation-
vitrification, (3) freezing and rewarming, (4) unloading, and (5) survival,
regrowth, and plant regeneration. A flow-chart of the encapsulation-vitrification
protocol is illustrated in Fig. 1.
To maintain sterility of emberyogenic cell suspensions, all appropriate
manipulations should be carried out in a laminar air-flow cabinet, using aseptic
techniques and sterile materials.
3.1. Maintenance of Embryogenic Cell Suspensions
1. One gram of Calli are transferred to a 250-mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 50 mL
of cell suspension maintenance medium.
2. The cell suspensions are incubated at 25°C in darkness on a gyratory shaker
at 90 rpm.
3. Subculture is carried out weekly by transfer of cell suspensions to fresh cell suspension
maintenance medium.
3.2. Encapsulation-Vitrification
1. Three days after subculture (see Note 1), embryogenic cell suspensions are collected
using a 25-mL sterile disposable pitet to remove the entire medium from
the 250-mL Erlenmeyer flask. In order to avoid loss of cells, empty the medium
while pressing the mouth of the pipet against the bottom of the Erlenmeyer so
that the cells do not penetrate into the pipet.
2. The cells are transferred to 2.5% sodium alginate solution by a ratio of 1 g cells to
3 mL solution (see Note 2) and mixed well.
3. The mixture is dripped with a 1-mL sterile pipet into 0.1 M calcium chloride
solution at room temperature and left for 20 min to form beads of about 4 mm in
diameter, each containing 25% (w/v) cells (see Note 2).
4. The beads are precultured stepwise on the preculture medium enriched with
increasing sucrose concentrations of 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 M for 3 d, with 1 d forCryopreservation of Cell Suspensions 81
each step (see Note 3). The preculture conditions are the same as for the maintenance
of embryogenic cell suspensions.
5. The precultured beads are rapidly surface-dried by blotting onto sterile 9-cm
Whatmann paper for a few seconds, and then transferred to a loading solution
and incubated for 60 min at room temperature in a laminar air-flow cabinet (see
Note 4).
6. The beads are rapidly surface dried by blotting onto sterile 9-cm Whatmann paper
for a few seconds, and then transferred to PVS2 cooled on ice and incubated for
270 min (see Note 5).
3.3. Freezing and Rewarming
1. The vitrified beads are rapidly surface dried by blotting on sterile 9-cm Whatmann
paper for a few seconds. Next, 10 beads are transferred into a 2-mL cryogenic
vial and directly immersed in a Taylor-Wharton Dewar Flask containing the liquid
nitrigen for 1 h.
Fig. 1. A flow-chart of cryopreservation of embryogenic cell suspensions by encapsulation-
vitrification procedure.82 Wang and Perl
2. Cryogenic vials containing frozen cells are rapidly removed from liquid nitrogen
and immetiately rewarmed at 40°C in a water bath for 3 min.
3.4. Unloading
1. Rewarmed beads are placed in the dilution medium for 30 min at room temperature
(see Note 6), followed by surface drying by blotting on sterile 9-cm
Whatmann paper for a few seconds.
3.5. Survival, Regrowth, and Plant Regeneration
1. The beads are post-cultured at 25°C in the dark for 3 d in 9-cm Petri dish (10
beads/dish) containing 30 mL recovery medium for survival (see Note 7).
2. For regrowth, the beads are transferred from the recovery medium to 9-cm Petri
dish (10 beads/dish) containing 30 mL regrowth medium and placed at 25°C in
the dark for 4 wk (see Note 8). Embryogenic cell suspensions are re-established
by suspending the beads in a 50-mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 50 mL of cell
suspension maintenance medium. The cultures are placed on a gyratory shaker
(90 rpm) at 25°C in the dark. Subculture is carried out every week.
3. For plant regeneration, the beads are transferred from the recovery medium to 9-
cm Petri dish (10 beads/dish) containing 30 mL plant regeneration medium. The
cultures are maintained at 25°C under a 16 photoperiod with a light intensity of
45 µmol/s/m2 provided by cool white fluorescent tubes. Four weeks later, single
embryos at the torpedo stage are transferred to Magenta GA7 vessels containing
50 mL rooting medium. The culture conditions are the same as for embryo maturation.
Subculture is done every 4 wk until a whole plantlet with a profuse root
system is developed.
4. Notes
1. Growth phase at which cells are harvested at the onset of the procedure is an
important factor for cryopreservation (12). Cells at the exponential growth stage
are more tolerant to freezing than those either at the lag or stationary stages
because they have small volume and vacuoles and contain relatively little water.
The growth pattern of cell suspensions differs with different plant species. For
several Vitis species and cultivars, the exponential growth stage is reached 3 d
after each subculture (8,13).
2. Cell density in the beads influences significantly the regrowth and embryo formation
of crypreserved cell suspensions. In general, from 25 to 50% cell density
were used in encapsulated beads (8,13–15). Regrowth of cryopresereved cells of
Catharanthus was found faster in the beads containing 50% than the 25% cells
(15), whereas efficiency of embryo formation in Vitis was much higher in beads
containing 25% cells (8,13).
3. Preculture is required to induce resistance of cell suspensions to dehydration and
subsequent freezing in liquid nitrogen. Sucrose is the most often used sugar for
induction of such tolerance at this step (3), although other sugars such as glucoseCryopreservation of Cell Suspensions 83
(16), glycerol (17), maltose (18), manitol (19), and sorbitol (18,20) were used.
Sugar concentration in the preculture medium ranges from 0.3 to 1 M for periods
varying between 1 h (18) and 9 d (15). Progressive increase in sucrose concentration
enables to avoid the deleteroius effects of direct exposure to high sucrose
concentrations (21). Preculture with high sugar concentrations (up to 0.75–1 M)
has been shown to increase the viability of cryopreserved cell suspensions of
Catharanthus roseus (15), Papaver somniferum (18), Vaccinium pahalae (14),
Medicago sative (22), Asparagus officinalis (23), and Vitis (8,13).
4. In vitrification-based cryopreservation procedures, cells have to be dehydrated
by exposure to a highly concentrated solution such as PVS2 prior to immersion
in liquid nitrogen. However, direct exposure of cells to PVS2 without
osmoprotection causes harmful effects on cells because of osmotic stress or
chemical toxicity (24), which has been described as a major limitation in determining
the success of cryopreservation of cells by vitrification (25). This major
limitation can be overcome by the loading treatment (24,25). In this treatment,
cells are placed at room temperature in a solution containing cryoprotective substances
such as sucrose, glycerol and ethylene glycol, for a short period varying
between 10 min (25,26) and 60 min (8), depending on plant scpeices. The most
often used loading solution is composed of a basic medium containing 2 M glycerol
and 0.4 M (8,25,26).
5. Two plant vitrification solutions are most frequently employed: one described by
Langis et al. (27), which comprises 40% (w/v) ethylene glycol, 15% sorbitol, and
6% bovine serum albumin, and the other (PVS2) described by Sakai et al. (11),
which consists of 30% (w/v) glycerol, 15% (w/v) ethylene glycol, and 15% (w/v)
DMSO 0.4 M sucrose. We applied both vitrification solutions to Vitis cell suspensions
with much better results obtained with PVS2. Overexposure to the vitrification
solution can cause chemical toxicity and excess osmotic stress (28),
eventually leading to reduced survival of cryopreserved cells. Dehydration can
be performed either at 0°C or at room temperature. The optimal time of exposure
to the vitrification solution varies with plant species, and depending on the temperature
during exposure, it ranges from 20 min (25) to 270 min (8). Dehydration
at 0°C takes longer time, but usually yields a higher survival of cryopreserved
cells (8,25), mainly through elimination or reduction in the chemical toxicity or
osmotic stress of vitrification solutions to plant cells (29).
6. Unloading is designed to dilute the vitrification solutions and remove
cryoprotectants from cryopreserved cell suspensions (30). Because of the extremely
high concentrations of the vitrification solutions, unloading is usually
performed either by a one-step dilution in a high-sugar concentration solution up
to 1.2 M (25) or by a stepwise dilution in decreasing sugar concentrations (22), in
order to reduce the osmotic shock. With Vitis cell suspensions, the best results
were achieved using 1 M sucrose solution for 30 min (8).
7. In many cases, recovery of cryopreserved cell suspensions was largely improved
when post cultured for a few days on a solid medium before being transferred to
liquid medium (8,31). Addition of activated charcoal to the recovery medium