Chapter 1
Introduction: Psychology and the U.S. Space Program
Albert A. Harrison
Department of Psychology University of California, Davis
Edna R. Fiedler
National Space Biomedical Research Institute Baylor College of Medicine
ABSTRACT
Astronauts live and work in highly unusual and challenging environments where they must withstand multiple stressors. Their abilities to maintain positive psycholog-ical outlooks and good interpersonal relations are crucial for personal well-being and mission success. From the inception of the space program, psychologists, psychiatrists, human factors experts, and other professionals have warned that the psychological stressors of space should be treated as a risk factor and that the risk would increase as missions involved larger, more diversified crews undertaking increasingly long flights. Thus, they called for research leading to the development and application of effective countermeasures. Although psychology played a significant role at the inception of the space program, for many years thereafter certain areas of psychology all but disappeared from NASA. Interest in psychosocial adaptation was rekindled in the mid-1990s when astronauts joined cosmonauts on the Russian space station Mir. NASA’s recognition of the field of behavioral health and its links to performance opened the door to many kinds of research that were formerly overlooked. Focusing on the underutilized areas of personality and social psychology, the chapters that follow discuss psychology’s struggle for acceptance, the history of astronaut selection and psychological support, the use of analog environments and simulators for research and training, space tourism, the psy-chological rewards of viewing Earth from space, crew composition and group dynam-ics, and cross-cultural aspects of international missions. This book concludes with a summary, integration, and evaluation of the role of psychology in space exploration.
1Psychology of Space Exploration
INTRODUCTION
“Once, I was evaluating astronaut applicants” says psychiatrist Nick Kanas. “I asked them to give me some examples of things that might cause stress.” One applicant, a test pilot, recalled the time he was flying an experimental aircraft and it spun out of con-trol. As the plane spiraled down, he took out his manual, calmly thumbed through it, and figured out how to pull the plane to safety. “His ability to temporarily control his emotions was strik-ing,” laughs Kanas.1
Fully aware of astronauts’ remarkable strengths, Kanas also knows that many physical and psychological stressors can pose risks to safety, performance, and qual-ity of life.2 Some of these stressors are associated with flight: riding atop a rocket; rapid acceleration and deceleration; somewhat primitive living conditions; iso-lation from family and friends; close confinement with other people; and the ever-present specter of a collision, system failure, or other disaster. Other types of stressors come from the astronaut’s career. From the earliest days of the space pro-gram, astronauts have served as societal exemplars, living under intense public scrutiny; carried heavy workloads on Earth as in space; and undergone prolonged absences from home for training, flight, and other purposes. They must withstand the typical hassles of trying to succeed within large bureaucracies, worry over flight assignments, and readjust to their families when they return to Earth.3 J. Kass, R. Kass, and I. Samaltedinov describe how some of this may seem to an astronaut:
1. “How Astronauts Get Along,” Science@NASA, 21 October 2002, available at http://science.msfc.nasa.gov/headlines/y2002/21oct_getalong.htm (accessed 29 March 2008).2. N. Kanas, “Psychosocial Factors Affecting Simulated and Actual Space Missions,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 56, no. 8 (August 1985): 806–811; N. Kanas, “Psychosocial Support for Cosmonauts,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 62, no. 4 (August 1991): 353–355; N. Kanas, V. P. Salnitskiy, J. B. Ritsher, V. I. Gushin, D. S. Weiss, S. A. Saylor, O. P. Kozerenko, and C. R. Marmar, “Human Interactions in Space: ISS vs. Shuttle/Mir,” Acta Astronautica 59 (2006): 413–419.3. W. E. Sipes and S. T. Vander Ark, “Operational Behavioral Health and Performance Resources for International Space Station Crews and Families,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sec. II (June 2005): B36–B41.
2Psychology of Space Exploration
INTRODUCTION
“Once, I was evaluating astronaut applicants” says psychiatrist Nick Kanas. “I asked them to give me some examples of things that might cause stress.” One applicant, a test pilot, recalled the time he was flying an experimental aircraft and it spun out of con-trol. As the plane spiraled down, he took out his manual, calmly thumbed through it, and figured out how to pull the plane to safety. “His ability to temporarily control his emotions was strik-ing,” laughs Kanas.1
Fully aware of astronauts’ remarkable strengths, Kanas also knows that many physical and psychological stressors can pose risks to safety, performance, and qual-ity of life.2 Some of these stressors are associated with flight: riding atop a rocket; rapid acceleration and deceleration; somewhat primitive living conditions; iso-lation from family and friends; close confinement with other people; and the ever-present specter of a collision, system failure, or other disaster. Other types of stressors come from the astronaut’s career. From the earliest days of the space pro-gram, astronauts have served as societal exemplars, living under intense public scrutiny; carried heavy workloads on Earth as in space; and undergone prolonged absences from home for training, flight, and other purposes. They must withstand the typical hassles of trying to succeed within large bureaucracies, worry over flight assignments, and readjust to their families when they return to Earth.3 J. Kass, R. Kass, and I. Samaltedinov describe how some of this may seem to an astronaut:
1. “How Astronauts Get Along,” Science@NASA, 21 October 2002, available at http://science.msfc.nasa.gov/headlines/y2002/21oct_getalong.htm (accessed 29 March 2008).2. N. Kanas, “Psychosocial Factors Affecting Simulated and Actual Space Missions,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 56, no. 8 (August 1985): 806–811; N. Kanas, “Psychosocial Support for Cosmonauts,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 62, no. 4 (August 1991): 353–355; N. Kanas, V. P. Salnitskiy, J. B. Ritsher, V. I. Gushin, D. S. Weiss, S. A. Saylor, O. P. Kozerenko, and C. R. Marmar, “Human Interactions in Space: ISS vs. Shuttle/Mir,” Acta Astronautica 59 (2006): 413–419.3. W. E. Sipes and S. T. Vander Ark, “Operational Behavioral Health and Performance Resources for International Space Station Crews and Families,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sec. II (June 2005): B36–B41.
2Introduction: Psychology and the U.S. Space Program
He knows he has been trained and put into space at great cost and effort, and he has a limited amount of time, especially dur-ing a short shuttle mission, to perform the tasks set out for him, efficiently. The precious data of the scientists on the ground, who have dedicated many years for this experiment, can be lost, the equipment can be damaged in such a way that it cannot be repaired in space, or worse still, his blunder can affect the safety of life on the spaceship. Even if such drastic errors are seldom, he is never-theless under great stress—he has to get the work done quickly, so that the next scheduled event can take place as planned. This kind of stress affects him not only as an individual, but as a mem-ber of a team: His peers are watching him, and he knows full well, not only will any mistakes made affect their work as well, but he fails in their eyes in a similar manner as a member of a sports team, whose error can affect the success of the team as a whole.4
This book discusses selected topics in the psychology of space exploration. In this and the following chapters, we and other contributors address the changing role of psychology within the U.S. space program, review the history of astronaut selection and training, and describe the evolution of techniques for providing astronauts and cosmonauts with psychological support. Contributing authors explain why and how psychologists use space-reminiscent settings (such as undersea habitats and polar out-posts) for research and training purposes. They trace the not-always-smooth course of the diversification of the astronaut corps from a homogenous collection of white, male test pilots to a more heterogeneous group including women and minorities. They tell about group dynamics and teamwork, as well as occasional friction between crews in flight and people in Mission Control. One of the most dramatic changes over 50 years of crewed flight has been the transition from fiercely competitive national space programs to collaborative efforts with international crews, so cultural issues are discussed. Over the past 50 years, space missions have changed, and so have salient behavioral issues and opportunities for psychologists.
4. J. Kass, R. Kass, and I. Samaltedinov, “Psychological Problems of Man in Space: Problems and Solutions,” Acta Astronautica 36 (1995): 657–660.
3Psychology of Space Exploration
How has psychology fared in the U.S. space program? In his presidential address to the Division of Engineering Psychology on 4 September 1961, Walter F. Grether affirmed psychology’s crucial role in the newly initiated conquest of space, noting that psychologists of that day were responding with creativity and vigor to the enor-mous behavioral challenges.5 Looking back over the history of aviation, Grether remarked that despite a few contributions to military aviation in World War I, for roughly 35 years after the Wright brothers’ initial flight at Kitty Hawk, aviation and psychology pretty much went separate ways. Then, beginning with research to benefit civilian aviation in the late 1930s and followed by a powerful military program in World War II, aviation psychology became prominent and influential. “How much different the role of psychology has been in man’s early ventures into space!” Grether wrote.6 Psychological testing, he continued, was prominent in the selection of the initial seven Mercury astronauts, and beyond selection psycholo-gists were productively engaged in vehicle design, training, task design, and work-load management.Grether pointed to four areas for future research: moving about the interior of spacecraft (once they became large enough for this to occur), conducting extrave-hicular activities (EVAs) or “spacewalks,” performing rendezvous, and living and working under conditions of prolonged isolation and confinement. Highly optimis-tic about America’s future in space, Grether foresaw a strong continuing partnership between psychology and space exploration. One of his few notes of pessimism—that it would not be possible to use the science fiction writer’s rocket gun to move from place to place during EVAs—would soon be proven wrong. Beyond provid-ing psychologists with new opportunities for employment and research support, he felt, space exploration would open new frontiers of knowledge and stimulate think-ing about new problems that would lead to new theories, hypotheses, and methods.Nearly three decades later, participants at the 30th anniversary of the 1959 founding of the International Ergonomics Association might conclude that Grether was right. In the field generally known as human factors in the U.S. and ergonomics in the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Europe, human factors specialists are interested in the scientific problems of experimental psychology, anatomy, and physiology
5. W. F. Grether, “Psychology and the Space Frontier,” American Psychologist 17, no. 2 (February 1962): 92–101.6. Ibid., pp. 92–93.
4Introduction: Psychology and the U.S. Space Program
applied to human work. Classically, human factors addresses people’s interaction with physical environments in work settings, but the interests of human factors spe-cialists have broadened over the years.7In this 1989 presidential address to the association, Alphonse Chapanis could point with pride to rapidly accumulating accomplishments everywhere in the field.8 Floods of data were appearing in area after area of human activity (work, trans-portation, leisure-time pursuits), and it was no longer possible to keep abreast of the latest journals and books. The hottest topic of 1989 was computers: how they had revolutionized society, how they spread beyond science and business and were embraced by everyday people, and how they could be humanized through the design of displays and controls. Certainly, much was left to be done—over the life-time of the association, 71 major railroad disasters had claimed 5,059 persons; 192 major aircraft accidents had killed over 20,000 people; and, in the previous 10 years alone, there had been thousands of nuclear “mishaps,” including prominent events at Chernobyl and Three Mile Island. Still, Chapanis’s theme was that ergonomics had “come a long way, baby,” and that the biggest stimulus for this was America’s forays into space:
Space flights have become so commonplace and so much is known about human performance in space that it is hard to remember the thousands of analyses, studies, and experiments that were done to pave the way for man’s leap into these hostile and unknown regions. There were problems of vehicle design involving exotic displays and controls. There were problems of vibration, of g-forces, and of weightlessness that had to be explored and solved. For extravehicular activity an entire self-contained environment had to be designed for astronauts and cosmonauts. Torqueless tools had to be designed for use by men who were floating freely and encumbered by space suits with limited mobility. There were problems of nutrition, waste disposal, and work-rest cycles. Nor
7. D. Meister, Conceptual Aspects of Human Factors (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989).8. A. Chapanis, “The International Ergonomics Association: Its First 30 Years,” Ergonomics 33, no. 3 (1990): 275–282.
5Psychology of Space Exploration
can we forget the problems of selection, training, and simulator design . . . . Our leap into space was a significant accomplishment of the past 30 years and the ergonomic findings that helped bring it about have enriched our profession in countless ways.9
But other assessments of psychologists’ contributions to the U.S. space program were less triumphant. In 1975, Robert L. Helmreich expressed pessimistic views of applying psychology in new areas, stating that prospective customers often respond with profound indifference.10 In 1983, he elaborated on how data relating to person-ality and social psychology were underused by the U.S. space program, which (as we shall see in chapter 2) he considered in contrast to robust use in the Soviet program.11 In a 1987 conference cosponsored by NASA and the National Science Foundation, psychologist and management consultant Philip R. Harris observed that
[a]lthough NASA has been forthright about medical and biolog-ical insights gained from previous spaceflights . . . the agency has been hesitant on studying or releasing information on the psycho-social experience of its personnel in space. Generally, NASA has limited the access to astronauts by social science researchers, even by its own psychiatrists and psychologists; the agency has failed to capitalize on the data it collected that could improve spaceflight and living for others to follow.12
In the early 1990s, outgoing flight surgeon and psychiatrist Patricia Santy con-cluded that despite an initial flurry of interest, behavioral research all but disap-
9. Ibid., pp. 276–277.10. R. L. Helmreich, “Applied Social Psychology: The Unfulfilled Promise,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 1 (1975): 548–561.11. R. L. Helmreich, “Applying Psychology to Outer Space: Unfulfilled Promises Revisited,” American Psychologist 38 (1983): 445–450.12. P. R. Harris, “Personnel Deployment Systems: Managing People in Polar and Outer Space Environments,” in From Antarctica to Outer Space: Life in Isolation and Confinement, ed. A. A. Harrison, Y. A. Clearwater, and C. P. McKay (New York: Springer, 1990), pp. 77–78.
6Introduction: Psychology and the U.S. Space Program
peared from NASA.13 For years, she wrote, psychology played a minimal role in astronaut selection, and because the assessment of individual astronaut performance was prohibited, it was not possible to collect normative data for test validation and other purposes. She characterized the application of psychology to space as run-ning 20 to 30 years behind most areas of medicine and identified formidable orga-nizational barriers to psychology within NASA. Joseph V. Brady, whose research on primate behavior in spaceflight dates back to the 1950s, states that following John Glenn’s flight, there was a dearth of in-flight behavioral experiments.14 Brady char-acterizes this as a 30-year hiatus in psychological health research for NASA, a gap that he thought must come to an end given NASA’s vision for humans in space. Peter Suedfeld cuts to the heart of the matter: “Through most of NASA’s existence, the behavioral sciences have been barely visible on the agency’s horizon.”15How can we reconcile such pessimistic views with the optimistic assessments of Grether and Chapanis? Robert Helmreich’s point was that, generally, those dis-ciplines that are rooted in biology, engineering, and experimental psychology have found greater acceptance within the space program than disciplines rooted in per-sonality, social, and organizational psychology. Lawrence Palinkas, an anthropol-ogist who has developed an enviable record of hands-on research experience in unusual environments, organized these issues in long-term spaceflight into three “domains”: the individual domain (stress and coping), the group dynamics domain (social interaction and intergroup relations), and the organizational domain (man-agement, organizational culture, and behavior).16From the beginning, physicians, psychologists, and their allies advocated strong behavioral research programs in NASA. Margaret A. Weitekamp points out how interest in high-altitude flight in the 1930s initiated research that evolved into aero-
13. P. A. Santy, Choosing the Right Stuff: The Psychological Selection of Astronauts and Cosmonauts (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1994).14. J. V. Brady, “Behavioral Health: The Propaedeutic Requirement,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B13–B23.15. P. Suedfeld, “Invulnerability, Coping, Salutogenesis, Integration: Four Phases of Spaceflight Psychology,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B61.16. L. Palinkas, “Psychosocial Issues in Long-Term Space Flight: An Overview,” Gravitational and Space Biology Bulletin 12, no. 2 (2001): 25–33.
7Psychology of Space Exploration
space medicine in the 1940s.17 Research to support pilots flying very fast and very high provided a basis for sending astronauts into space. The first conference with “space” in the title was prior to 1950, notes Weitekamp, but some space-oriented research was clandestine or integrated into aviation medicine and psychology in order to avoid the wrath of superiors who thought it wasteful to study “Buck Rogers” issues. In 1961, Bernard Flaherty edited Psychophysiological Aspects of Space Flight, which focused on the sensory and biotechnical aspects of spaceflight and simulations, as well as address-ing issues of human durability.18 Human Factors in Jet and Space Travel also appeared that year.19 The latter was edited by Saul B. Sells, a NASA consultant who first wrote about astronaut selection and training in 1957, and Charles A. Berry, at one time NASA Director of Life Science and physician to the astronauts. They dealt with per-formance under conditions of acceleration and deceleration, as well as human adap-tation to space. In 1967, Joseph Kubis, along with Edward J. McLaughlin, specifically addressed the psychological aspects of spaceflight.20 They noted that whereas short-term spaceflight did not have adverse effects on functioning, factors such as emotional stability and group dynamics could prove important in future missions. As would many other writers, they illustrated their points with studies of psychological reac-tions to isolation and confinement in terrestrial settings.In the early 1970s, Joseph Kubis addressed issues of group dynamics: group composition, leadership, and teamwork.21 In 1971, Air Force psychiatrist Nick Kanas, in collaboration with William E. Fedderson, released an outline of many of the psychological and psychiatric issues that have filtered down and influence discussions today.22
17. M. A. Weitekamp, Right Stuff Wrong Sex: America’s First Women in Space Program (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004).18. B. E. Flaherty, Psychophysiological Aspects of Space Flight (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961).19. S. B. Sells and C. A. Berry, eds., Human Factors in Space and Jet Travel: A Medical-Psychological Analysis (New York: Ronald Press, 1961).20. J. F. Kubis and E. J. McLaughlin, “Psychological Aspects of Spaceflight,” Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences 30, no. 2 (1967): 320–330.21. J. F. Kubis, “Isolation, Confinement, and Group Dynamics in Long Duration Spaceflight,” Acta Astronautica 17 (1972): 45–72.22. N. Kanas and W. E. Fedderson, Behavioral, Psychiatric, and Sociological Problems of Long Duration Missions (Washington, DC: NASA Technical Memorandum X-58067, 1971).
8Introduction: Psychology and the U.S. Space Program
In 1972, the National Academy of Sciences released the report of a study panel chaired by Donald B. Lindsley of the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA).23 The panel sought “to indicate the blocks of research, roughly in order of priority that will be most fruitful in the years ahead in coming to grips with the problems of long-duration missions . . . . In this, there is little doubt in the minds of the study participants that the difficulties are formidable, the unknowns signif-icant, and the prerequisite research extensive . . . .”24 Many of the experts were interested in space physiology and medicine, but the panel also included psychol-ogists with expertise in stress, social interaction, and behavior in unusual environ-ments. In addition to recommending basic biomedical and life-support research, the panel urged studies of skilled performance, environmental habitability, group pro-cesses, interpersonal interaction, and the relationship of the space crew “microso-ciety” to the larger flight team. In 1977, partially in response to Lindsley’s report, Mary M. Connors and her associates began a review of the then-current founda-tions for understanding behavior during anticipated Space Shuttle and space sta-tion missions.25 Their report, not published until 1985, identified a middle ground between narrowly focused experiments and bold generalizations. They adopted an open systems approach and addressed topics at the individual, small group, and organizational levels.In the late 1980s, the Committee on Space Biology and Medicine of the National Research Council gave further impetus to psychology, noting that “[a]lthough the evidence is fragmentary, it seems likely that behavioral and social problems have already occurred during long-term missions . . . . An understanding of the problems and their amelioration is essential if man desires to occupy space for extended periods of time. Even more important from a scientific perspective, it seems likely that significant advances in our basic knowledge of human interaction
23. D. B. Lindsley, ed., Human Factors in Long Duration Spaceflight (Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences, 1972).24. Ibid., p. 15.25. M. M. Connors, A. A. Harrison, and F. R. Akins, Living Aloft: Human Requirements for Extended Spaceflight (Washington, DC: NASA SP-483, 1985).
9Psychology of Space Exploration
and processes will emerge from the research needed to ensure effective performance and adjustment in space.”26Revisiting the issue some 10 years later, a subsequent Committee on Space Biology and Medicine reaffirmed the urgency of their predecessors’ recommenda-tions: “Despite this [the 1987 panel’s] assessment of the importance of behavioral issues, little progress has been made transforming the recommendations for research on human behavior and performance in space into action . . . . As could be pre-dicted from controlled simulation studies, the history of space exploration has seen many instances of reduced energy levels, mood changes, poor interpersonal rela-tions, faulty decision-making, and lapses in memory and attention. Although these negative psychological reactions have yet to result in disaster, this is no justification for ignoring problems that may have disastrous consequences. Furthermore, there are degrees of failure short of disaster and degrees of success short of perfection; if favorable organizational and environmental conditions can increase the level and probability of success, they are worthy of consideration.”27The 1998 Committee’s recommendations included studying the effects of the physical and psychosocial environment of spacecraft on cognitive, psychophysi-ological, and affective measures of behavior and performance; the development and evaluation of countermeasures for mitigating adverse effects of the physical and social environments on individual and group performance; in-flight studies of the characteristics of sleep during long-duration missions; ground-based studies of change and stability in individual psychophysiological patterns in response to psy-chosocial and environmental stressors; the effects of individual differences on cog-nitive, psychophysiological, and affective measures of behavior and performance; improved methods for assessing interpersonal relations and crew compatibility; and improved training [didactic and experiential] in psychological and social adapta-tion to space. The Committee also urged exploring the effects of crew composition on crew tension, cohesion, and performance; factors affecting ground-crew commu-nication and interactions; and conditions that affect the distribution of authority, decision-making, and task assignments between space crews and ground control.
26. Committee on Space Biology and Medicine, A Strategy for Space Medicine and Medical Science for the 1980s and 1990s (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1987), p. 169.27. Committee on Space Biology and Medicine, A Strategy for Research in Space Biology and Medicine in the New Century (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1998), p. 169.
10Introduction: Psychology and the U.S. Space Program
In 2001, the National Academy of Sciences issued Safe Passage: Astronaut Care for Exploration Missions,28 prepared by the Committee on Creating a Vision for Space Medicine During Travel Beyond Earth Orbit of the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences. This panel of experts identified some of the medical and behavioral issues that should be resolved quickly in anticipation of a return to the Moon and a mission to Mars. This far-ranging work covers astronaut health in transit to Earth orbit and beyond, health maintenance, emergency and continuing care, the development of a new infrastructure for space medicine, and medical ethics. Most importantly for present purposes, Safe Passage includes a chap-ter on behavioral health, a topic that we discuss in some detail in chapter 2.Different missions raise different questions about human behavior. The most conspicuous questions of the earliest days of spaceflight had to do with life sup-port, the human-machine interface, and the optimization of human performance to ensure mission success. Certainly these topics remain crucial today, but to them we may add many more. Following Apollo and the race to the Moon, NASA entered new eras in 1981, when the Space Shuttle took flight, and again in 1993, when astronauts joined cosmonauts first on Russia’s Mir space station and then on the International Space Station (ISS) in 2000. Topics such as habitability, loneliness, cultural conflicts, the need to sustain a high level of performance over the long haul, and postflight adjustment gained a degree of immediacy and could no lon-ger be ignored. Consistent with Davis Meister’s views on conceptual changes in human factors, there has been, over the years, a shift from a purely “displays and knobs” orientation to a more holistic approach, with project managers, engineers, and behavioral researchers sharing the goal of a seamless human-machine structure or “system integration.”29In their discussion of post-Apollo psychological issues, Connors and her asso-ciates noted that as missions change, so do behavioral requirements.30 Perhaps the most conspicuous trends are in the direction of increased crew size, diversity, and mission duration. The first round of U.S. flights, under Project Mercury, were solo but rapidly gave way to two-person crews with the advent of Project Gemini in
28. J. R. Ball and C. H. Evans, eds., Safe Passage: Astronaut Care for Exploration Missions (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2001).29. Meister, Conceptual Aspects of Human Factors.30. Connors et al., Living Aloft.
11Psychology of Space Exploration
1965, followed by three-person crews during the Apollo program. After Mercury, note Clay Foushee and Robert Helmreich, the test pilot became a less relevant model than the multi-engine aircraft commander, who not only requires technical skills but also requires human relations skills as the leader of a team.31 America’s first space station, Skylab, provided a “house in space” for three-person crews; apart from occasional emergencies or visitors, three-person crews were also typical for Soviet (1970–89) and then Russian (1990 and onwards) space stations and the ISS. Space Shuttles are relatively capacious and usually carry six to eight crewmembers. Other than during brief visits from Shuttle crews, the ISS has been home to crews of two to six people. We suspect that later space stations will house larger crews. Although it is possible to envision huge orbiting platforms and communities on the Moon and Mars, foreseeable missions are unlikely to exceed eight people, so crews will remain within the “small group” range.A second salient trend is toward increasing diversity of crew composition. The initial vision was for a highly diverse pool of astronaut candidates, including moun-tain climbers, deep sea divers, and arctic explorers, but, as will be explained in the next chapter, it was military test pilots who got the nod. The military remains well represented, but over the years, the astronaut corps has been expanded to include people from many different professions and a greater number of women and minori-ties. Further complexity was added with the Soviet guest cosmonaut program begin-ning in the 1970s, the inclusion of international crewmembers on the Shuttle, and international missions on Mir and the ISS. Already, tourists have entered the mix, and the first industrial workers in commercial space ventures may not be far behind.Third, initial spaceflights were measured in hours, then days. (Indeed, within each series of flights, successive Mercury and then Gemini flights were longer and longer, to establish that astronauts could withstand the long trip to the Moon.) The third Skylab crew remained on orbit 84 days. Skylab was short-lived, but the Soviets set endurance records in this area; the present record of 366 days was set by a Russian cosmonaut on Mir during a 1987–88 mission. ISS missions have usu-ally lasted about three months, but individuals are staying on the Space Station for up to six months, as demonstrated in 2007 and 2008 by Sunni Williams and Peggy
31. H. C. Foushee and R. L. Helmreich, “Group Interactions and Flight Crew Performance,” in Human Factors in Aviation, ed. E. L. Wiener and D. C. Nagel (New York: Academic Press, 1998), pp. 189–228.
12Introduction: Psychology and the U.S. Space Program
Whitson. Extended stays can also result from unexpected circumstances, such as the loss of the Shuttle Columbia, which delayed the retrieval of one crew. If and when humans go to Mars, the sheer distance may require a transit time of two years.Technology is advancing in all areas, including space exploration. Over the years, electromechanical gauges that dominated cockpits were replaced first with cathode-ray tubes and now with digital displays. New technology is leading to new human-machine partnerships, with computer-based decision aids, improved com-munications, and increased availability of automated systems and robotics. New on-board systems will augment the astronauts’ ability to diagnose and solve flight problems, and it is reasonable to expect improved launch and recovery systems.32In the chapters that follow, psychologists with strong interests in space discuss selected research topics within their historical contexts. In chapter 2, we trace the uneven course of psychology in the space program and describe the history of astro-naut selection and psychological support. In chapter 3, Sheryl Bishop points out that whereas there has been limited opportunity to study astronauts in space, there has been ample opportunity to study people in environments that in some ways resem-ble that of space. These analogs include polar camps and undersea research vessels that share danger, deprivation, isolation, confinement, and other characteristics with spacecraft, along with simulators intended to imitate or mimic spaceflight conditions. In comparison to studies conducted in “everyday” or laboratory settings, studies set in these more extreme environments offer a balance between accessibility and experi-mental control on the one hand and a degree of environmental realism on the other. Bishop discusses a wide range of analogs and simulators in the United States and abroad and notes that these are absolutely crucial for training purposes.Spaceflight has positive and rewarding as well as stressful characteristics, and in chapter 4, Julie Robinson, Kelley J. Slack, Valerie Olson, Mike Trenchard, Kim Willis, Pam Baskin, and Jennifer Boyd discuss one of these psychological benefits: observing Earth. They present a unique study of taking pictures from space. This is an excellent example of an unobtrusive study, that is, one that does not set up expectations on the part of the research participants or infringe on their privacy. An overwhelming proportion of the photographs taken from the ISS are initiated
32. J. W. McCandless, M. K. Kaiser, T. Barth, R. S. McCann, N. J. Currie, and B. Woolford, “Human-Systems Integration Challenges for Constellation,” Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting Proceedings, Aerospace Systems 5 (2007): 96–100.
13Psychology of Space Exploration
by crewmembers. What kinds of substitute activities can we devise for some future missions when looking out the window may not be an option?Then, Harvey Wichman points out that soon, spaceflight may no longer be a government monopoly and future spacefarers may include growing proportions of tourists and industrial workers. This situation may require departing from the gov-ernment agency form of organization that has dominated space exploration so far in favor of a private enterprise model of commercial space exploration; it will also require accommodating people who lack the qualifications of today’s astronauts and cosmonauts. In his view, society is at a historical threshold that will require a shift in how engineers, designers, flight managers, and crews perform their tasks. He illus-trates some of these points with his industry-sponsored simulation study intended to gauge tourist reactions to spaceflight.Group dynamics is a focal point for Jason Kring and Megan A. Kaminski, who explore gender effects on social interaction and the determinants of interpersonal cohesion (commitment to membership in the group) and task cohesion (commit-ment to the work at hand). Their review of the basic literature on mixed-gender groups, as well as findings from spaceflight and other extreme environments, points to the conclusion that whereas there are many benefits to mixed-gender crews (typ-ically, men and women bring different skills to the mix), the issue is multifaceted and complex and poses challenges for spaceflight operations. Although psychol-ogists are gaining some understanding of the determinants of crew cohesion, the effects on performance depend upon the type of cohesion (interpersonal and task) and the nature of the task. None of this is simplified by findings that cohesion is likely to fluctuate over the course of an extended mission.Cross-cultural issues dominate the next two chapters. In “Flying with Strangers,” Peter Suedfeld, Kasia Wilk, and Lindi Cassel draw a distinction between multinational crews, in which “guests” were allowed to participate in U.S. or Soviet/Russian missions, and international crews, which first appeared aboard the International Space Station, which is not owned and operated by any one nation. Through studying the reminiscences of majority and minority participants in mul-tinational and international missions, they test the hypothesis that multinational flights are a source of frustration and annoyance that are not evident in the true partnerships of international flights. Then, Juris Draguns and Albert Harrison elab-orate on cross-cultural issues and propose applying a cultural assimilator to build cross-cultural awareness and sensitivity.
14Introduction: Psychology and the U.S. Space Program
In the final chapter of this book, Gro Sandal and Gloria Leon present a sum-mary and integration that places the earlier chapters within broader historical, cul-tural, and organizational contexts. They point out that whereas we can point with pride to past accomplishments, missions will continue to change and there will always be a need for more research and new operational procedures. The research that is done—and, perhaps more importantly, that is not done—reflects political as well as scientific and operational concerns. Many of psychology’s advances within the American program are recent, and it is not clear if these gains will withstand the test of time. However, sponsors of other programs, such as the European Space Agency (ESA), understand that psychology is one of the many disciplines required to ensure successful spaceflight.We conclude our introduction with three important caveats. First, although most of the chapters in this book are authored or coauthored by psychologists and make repeated references to psychology, understanding and managing human behavior in space is an interdisciplinary effort. In essence, “spaceflight psychology” includes contributions from architecture and design, engineering, biology, medi-cine, anthropology, sociology, communications, and organizational studies, as well as many hybrids (such as cognitive science) and disciplines within psychology (such as environmental, social, and clinical). In a similar vein, the delivery of psycho-logical services to astronauts involves physicians, psychiatrists, social workers, and peers, as well as psychologists.Second, no one pretends that the chapters in this volume are representative of psychology (never mind the broader field of behavioral science) as a whole. Our essays do not provide in-depth treatment of the interface between engineer-ing and psychology, nor do they attend to the interface of biology and behavior, for example, the effects of cumulative fatigue and circadian rhythms on performance and risk. With respect to this, we note a recent chapter by Barbara Woolford and Frances Mount that described how, over the past 40 years, research on anthro-pometrics, biomechanics, architecture, and other ergonomics issues slowly shifted from surviving and functioning in microgravity to designing space vehicles and habitats to produce the greatest returns for human knowledge.33
33. Barbara Woolford and Frances Mount, “Human Space Flight,” in Handbook of Human Factors and Ergonomics, ed. Gavriel Salvendi, 3rd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2006), pp. 929–955.
15Psychology of Space Exploration
Finally, apart from psychological studies of astronauts, we acknowledge many other areas where psychology interfaces with NASA. For example, NASA main-tains an excellent program in aviation human factors. Even robotic missions, such as those already dispatched to Mars, have a human touch. It is necessary to assem-ble, organize, and train teams to manage such missions. Considerable preparation is necessary for successful teleoperations, for example, Earth-bound researchers conducting a “glove box” experiment aboard a satellite thousands of miles away or driving a teleoperated rover on Mars. Some automated satellites are designed for easy servicing by Shuttle crews. Satellites devoted to remote sensing must be designed with human sensory, perceptual, and information processing systems in mind. Furthermore, the loss of Challenger and Columbia reflected organizational and behavioral factors such as miscommunication and faulty judgment as well as tech-nical failures.34 Astronauts in flight are the focal point of this volume, but there are many areas where psychology can contribute to NASA.
34. M. M. McConnell, Challenger: A Major Malfunction (New York: Doubleday, 1987); D. Vaughan, The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture and Deviance at NASA (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996).
16Chapter 2
Behavioral Health
Albert A. Harrison
Department of Psychology University of California, Davis
Edna R. Fiedler
National Space Biomedical Research Institute Baylor College of Medicine
ABSTRACT
Experience gained from test pilots, high-altitude balloonists, and animals sent on rocket flights was the starting point for understanding astronaut adaptation and perfor-mance in space. Psychology played a significant role in Project Mercury, but before that effort was complete, official interest in such topics as astronaut selection, psychosocial adjustment, group dynamics, and psychological support all but disappeared. Interest was rekindled when astronauts joined cosmonauts on Mir and then became full partners on the International Space Station. We review reasons for this period of minimal involve-ment in the space program and suggest that the “right stuff” image worked against the field until the mid-1990s, when space station expeditions brought the challenges of long-duration missions into focus. Evidence of renewed interest includes the advent of the National Space Biomedical Research Institute, the development of NASA’s Bioastronautics Critical Path Roadmap, and the new Human Research Program. In 2001, Safe Passage: Astronaut Care for Exploration Missions drew attention to behavioral health, a concept of psychosocial adjustment that depends not only an absence of neuropsychiatric dysfunction but on the presence positive interactions with the physical and social envi-ronments. We trace the history and current status of astronaut selection and psychological support, two essential ingredients for maintaining behavioral health, from Mercury to the ISS. Behavioral health is important because it reduces risk, helps optimize performance, and contributes to the welfare of astronauts and their families. We conclude with a brief outline for a comprehensive and continuing program in spaceflight behavioral health.
17Psychology of Space Exploration
INTRODUCTION
In the 1950s, as America prepared for its first crewed space missions, it was not clear that human performance capabilities could be maintained under the demanding conditions of spaceflight. Where could NASA begin? Much of the research, equipment, and testing procedures used to support test pilots who set suc-cessive speed and altitude records transferred easily to the early space program.1 Decompression chambers, centrifuges, rocket sleds, and the like made it possible to explore the physiological and performance aspects of conditions that would be encountered in space. Craig Ryan has detailed the contributions of high-altitude ballooning, highlighting the usefulness of gondola designs (which he contends pro-vided a basis for the Mercury spacecraft), flight suits, helmets, and much more.2 Not everything could be “off the shelf”; NASA had to develop elaborate simulators for upcoming space missions. But, on the whole, the same “cast of characters”—engi-neers, physicians, and psychologists, to mention a few—who brought America to the edge of space brought America into space.Animal studies gave some reassurance that humans could adapt physiologi-cally and behaviorally to space.3 As early as the late 1940s, biological specimens were launched on balloons and sounding rockets. In 1958, the Russians successfully launched a dog, Laika, who survived several days in orbit even though she could not be brought back to Earth. Wernher von Braun approached behavioral biolo-gist Joseph V. Brady to see if he would be willing to launch primates, which would leapfrog the Soviets’ dogs.4 In 1958 and 1959, America’s first primate spacefarers, two squirrel monkeys named Able and Baker (known at that time as Miss Able and Miss Baker) were launched on 15-minute flights reaching an altitude of 300 miles on a 1,500-mile trajectory and were successfully recovered following splashdown.
1. T. Wolfe, The Right Stuff (New York: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, 1979); M. A. Weitekamp, Right Stuff, Wrong Sex: America’s First Women in Space Program (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004).2. C. Ryan, The Pre-Astronauts: Manned Ballooning on the Threshold of Space (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1995).3. C. Burgess and C. Dubbs, Animals in Space: From Research Rockets to the Space Shuttle (Chichester, U.K.: Springer Praxis, 2007).4. Anon., “Journal Interview 64: Conversation with Joseph V. Brady,” Addiction 100 (2005): 1805–1812.
18Behavioral Health
One of the main questions was whether the test animals could keep their wits about them in the sense that they could do what they had been taught to do dur-ing the presumably terrifying rocket rides. Able and Baker were encased in casts to protect them against gravitational changes, but one finger and one toe were exposed so that, after a warning light turned on, the finger could be used to press a lever to avoid a shock to the toe. All the way up and all the way down, they pressed the lever on cue. Later, as a part of the Mercury pretest program, the chim-panzees Ham and Enos received much more elaborate and sophisticated training than did their predecessors.5 They flew in special couches within Mercury capsules; Ham’s flight was suborbital, but Enos completed four orbits. Although acceleration and deceleration forces in excess of 7 g’s had an immediate effect on the chimpan-zees’ performance, once these forces diminished, their performance bounced back to preflight levels. Microgravity did not interfere with visual processes (monitor-ing the lights), nor did it interfere with eating and drinking. Not only did they per-form their assigned tasks in space, but the two chimpanzees also returned to Earth in good health and with their sharply honed skills intact.6 Looking back at an epi-sode from this era, Joseph Brady recounted:
On the recovery ship, after the helicopter had dropped the cap-sule once or twice before obtaining a good connection on one of these animal pre-test flights—a good reason for practicing before the human flights—the hatch was opened on the flight deck and the chimp came out sputtering and thrashing about. An admi-ral standing on the deck with several of us said something like “If that chimp could only talk”, in response to which I felt required to observe that the best thing that ever happened to us was that the chimp could not talk or the space program might have come to an abrupt end right on the spot.7
5. F. H. Rholes, Jr., M. E. Grunzke, and H. H. Reynolds, “Chimpanzee Performance During the Ballistic and Orbital Project Mercury Flights,” Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology 86, no. 1 (1963): 2–10.6. J. V. Brady, “Behavioral Health: The Propaedeutic Requirement,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B13–B24.7. Anon., “ Journal Interview 64”: 1811.
19Behavioral Health
One of the main questions was whether the test animals could keep their wits about them in the sense that they could do what they had been taught to do dur-ing the presumably terrifying rocket rides. Able and Baker were encased in casts to protect them against gravitational changes, but one finger and one toe were exposed so that, after a warning light turned on, the finger could be used to press a lever to avoid a shock to the toe. All the way up and all the way down, they pressed the lever on cue. Later, as a part of the Mercury pretest program, the chim-panzees Ham and Enos received much more elaborate and sophisticated training than did their predecessors.5 They flew in special couches within Mercury capsules; Ham’s flight was suborbital, but Enos completed four orbits. Although acceleration and deceleration forces in excess of 7 g’s had an immediate effect on the chimpan-zees’ performance, once these forces diminished, their performance bounced back to preflight levels. Microgravity did not interfere with visual processes (monitor-ing the lights), nor did it interfere with eating and drinking. Not only did they per-form their assigned tasks in space, but the two chimpanzees also returned to Earth in good health and with their sharply honed skills intact.6 Looking back at an epi-sode from this era, Joseph Brady recounted:
On the recovery ship, after the helicopter had dropped the cap-sule once or twice before obtaining a good connection on one of these animal pre-test flights—a good reason for practicing before the human flights—the hatch was opened on the flight deck and the chimp came out sputtering and thrashing about. An admi-ral standing on the deck with several of us said something like “If that chimp could only talk”, in response to which I felt required to observe that the best thing that ever happened to us was that the chimp could not talk or the space program might have come to an abrupt end right on the spot.7
5. F. H. Rholes, Jr., M. E. Grunzke, and H. H. Reynolds, “Chimpanzee Performance During the Ballistic and Orbital Project Mercury Flights,” Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology 86, no. 1 (1963): 2–10.6. J. V. Brady, “Behavioral Health: The Propaedeutic Requirement,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B13–B24.7. Anon., “ Journal Interview 64”: 1811.
19Psychology of Space Exploration
During the early 1960s, the United States and Soviet Russia were locked in a race to the Moon, and in many ways, the two programs paralleled each other. In the United States, solo missions (Mercury) gave way to two-person missions (Gemini) and then to three-person missions (Apollo) that, in July of 1969, brought astro-nauts to the Moon. The Apollo Applications Program followed close on the heels of the last astronaut’s departure from the Moon. Based on leftover Moon race equip-ment, the Apollo Applications Program included the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, where Americans and Soviets joined spacecraft to live together briefly in space, and Skylab, America’s “house in space” in the mid-1970s.8 By the late 1970s, the U.S. and Soviet programs were following different paths: Americans awaited the orbiter, or Space Shuttle, and Soviets launched a series of space stations. In 1984, President Ronald Reagan approved the development of a U.S. space station, but construction was delayed almost 15 years. President Bill Clinton approved the station as a multi-national venture, and it became the International Space Station, or ISS. Prior to its construction, American astronauts joined Russian cosmonauts on Mir; later, they worked together as partners on the ISS. The ISS recently reached its 10th anniver-sary of having multinational crews living and working in space.Although psychology played a prominent role in the early U.S. space pro-gram, some branches had all but disappeared by 1963. To be sure, psychologists did show professional interest in humans in space, and many panels and commissions sought to increase psychology’s involvement (see chapter 1). Since there were prac-tically no studies of astronauts, researchers relied heavily on studies conducted in Antarctica, submarines and research submersibles, and simulators. Research con-tinues in all three venues; Antarctica took an early lead and remained prominent for many years.9 A primary reason was that International Geophysical “Year” (IGY, 1957–59) stimulated research on human adaptation to isolation and confinement, with the authoritative and influential accounts appearing in the early 1970s.10
8. H. S. F. Cooper, Jr., A House in Space (New York: Bantam Books, 1976).9. L. A. Palinkas, “The Psychology of Isolated and Confined Environments: Understanding Human Behavior in Antarctica,” American Psychologist 58, no. 3 (2003): 353–363.10. E. K. E. Gunderson, Human Adaptability to Antarctic Conditions (Washington, DC: American Geophysical Union, 1973); J. E. Rasmussen, ed., Man in Isolation and Confinement (Chicago: Aldine, 1973).
20Behavioral Health
Other factors that favored Antarctica were the large number of people who ventured there and that, as an international site, it offers opportunities for research-ers from many different nations. By picking and choosing research locations, one can find conditions that resemble those of many different kinds of space mis-sions, ranging from relatively luxurious space stations to primitive extraterrestrial camps.11 In 1963, Robert Voas, one of the early space human factors experts, and E. K. Eric Gunderson, who had conducted pioneering psychological research in Antarctica, seriously discussed developing a space mission simulator there, an idea that reemerges from time to time.12 By the 1980s, it was recognized widely that Antarctica provided a useful meeting ground for people who were interested in adaptation to polar environments and people who were interested in adaptation to space. In 1987, NASA and the National Science Foundation’s Division of Polar Programs joined together to sponsor the “Sunnyvale Conference,” which brought together researchers from each tradition. Presentations centered on environments (Antarctica and space), theoretical perspectives, isolation and confinement effects, and interventions and outcomes.13 Antarctic behavioral research became a truly international venture guided in part by the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research and funded by many sources, including NASA. For example, Des Lugg of NASA Headquarters and Joanna Woods at Johnson Space Center conducted med-ical and psychological research with the Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions.14 The next chapter provides further discussion of analog environments.
11. D. T. Andersen, C. P. McKay, R. A. Wharton, Jr., and J. D. Rummel, “An Antarctic Research as a Model for Planetary Exploration,” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 43 (1990): 499–504.12. E. K. E. Gunderson, “Preface,” in From Antarctica to Outer Space: Life in Isolation and Confinement, ed. A. A. Harrison, Y. A. Clearwater, and C. P. McKay (New York: Springer, 1990), p. 1.13. A. A. Harrison, Y. A. Clearwater, and C. P. McKay, “The Human Experience in Antarctica: Applications to Life in Space,” Behavioral Science 34, no. 4 (1989): 253–271; Harrison et al., From Antarctica to Outer Space.14. J. Wood, L. Schmidt, D. Lugg, J. Ayton, T. Phillips, and M. Shepanek, “Life, Survival and Behavioral Health in Small Closed Communities: 10 Years of Studying Small Antarctic Groups,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B89–B94; D. J. Lugg, “Behavioral Health in Antarctica: Implications for Long-Duration Space Missions,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B74–B78.
21Psychology of Space Exploration
As noted in chapter 1, despite repetitive calls for action, empirical research was slow to accumulate. In the late 1990s, the National Academy of Sciences under-took a comprehensive review of behavioral and medical issues that we need to begin to address right now to prepare for future space missions. We consider the Academy’s report, Safe Passage: Astronaut Care for Exploration Missions, a water-shed event.15 Like earlier calls to action, Safe Passage drew attention to many bio-medical, behavioral, and psychological issues and emphasized their importance for health, performance, and welfare on extended-duration missions. The timing was good because its production and distribution coincided with American missions on board Mir and the first missions to the ISS. Although future-oriented, it was devel-oped in the context of unfolding events on then-contemporary extended-duration missions. Most importantly, this work also introduced the concept of behavioral health, an idea that may be particularly useful because of its breadth and relative lack of pejorative connotations. According to one recent definition, “Compared with earlier formulations (such as mental health), behavioral health is less limited in that it recognizes that effective, positive behavior depends on an interaction with the physical and social environments, as well as an absence of neuropsychiat-ric dysfunction. Behavioral health is evident not only at the level of the individual, but also at the levels of the group and organization.”16NASA’s recognition of the field of behavioral health and linking of it to perfor-mance opened the door for many of the kinds of research that earlier were thought to be too “soft” to be useful to the space program.17 Today, NASA has shown increased recognition of shared perspectives, privacy, leisure-time activity, family separation and reunification, cultural awareness, the satisfying properties of win-dows and view ports, and many other topics that were formerly overlooked if not seen as irrelevant or frivolous. From NASA’s perspective, the significance of these factors is less in the fact that they can help people “feel good” (although many psy-
15. J. R. Ball and C. H. Evans, eds., Safe Passage: Astronaut Care for Exploration Missions (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2001).16. A. A. Harrison, “Behavioral Health: Integrating Research and Application in Support of Exploration Missions,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B3.17. Bioastronautics Critical Path Roadmap, http://bioastroroadmap.nasa.gov/index.jsp (accessed 29 March 2008).
22Behavioral Health
chologists would argue that this is a major benefit) than in their potential impact on risk and performance. This research, in turn, has implications for organizing and staging space missions. Thus, a combination of maturing social science and inter-est sparked by space station and exploration missions has opened the door, at least partially, for new kinds of psychological research within the U.S. space program. Whether this door will remain open—or slam shut—remains to be seen.
THE RIGHT STUFF
For decades, expanding the role of psychology in the U.S. space program was an uphill battle with psychologists’ pleas generally falling on deaf ears. Among the more obvious interpretations, it might be tempting to think of NASA manag-ers and engineers as “thing” people rather than “people” people, so the behavioral side of spaceflight is of little interest to them. Perhaps mission managers were sim-ply unaware of the significance of behavioral factors. Or maybe, as “hard” scien-tists, they saw the behavioral and social sciences as fuzzy and inexact efforts that lead to qualitative recommendations that are difficult to implement and unlikely to work. The sociologist Charles Perrow has discussed how resistance to human fac-tors within complex organizations has strong structural and cultural underpinnings and is not overcome easily.18Psychologists make contributions to human welfare in such diverse areas as environmental design, problem-solving, decision-making, leadership, and group performance, but many people strongly associate psychology with mental illness and long-term psychotherapy. If such attitudes explained NASA’s ambivalence about behavioral factors, education would be the antidote; but for many years, edu-cational efforts had little visible impact in research or mission operations.The stereotype of clinical psychologists and psychiatrists working with troubled clients may have threatening implications for NASA administrators who need to maintain good public relations and build government support. The historian Roger Launius points out that from the moment they were introduced to the public in
18. C. E. Perrow, “The Organizational Context of Human Factors Engineering,” Administrative Science Quarterly 28, no. 4 (1983): 521–541.
23Psychology of Space Exploration
1959, America was enthralled by the “virtuous, no nonsense, able and professional astronauts” who “put a very human face on the grandest technological endeavor in history” and “represented the very best that we had to offer.”19 From the beginning, the press was never motivated to dig up dirt on the astronauts; rather, reporters sought confirmation that they embodied America’s deepest virtues. “They wanted to demonstrate to their readers that the Mercury seven strode the Earth as latter-day saviors whose purity coupled with noble deeds would purge this land of the evils of communism by besting the Soviet Union on the world stage.”20 Today, people look back longingly to a simpler era when good was good and evil was evil, and, at least in memory, heroes did not disappoint. Psychological research or, worse yet, the faintest possibility that a mission would be compromised by psychological fac-tors could be a public relations nightmare.For project managers and engineers, faith in the right stuff helps cut costs because the person can be engineered out of the equation. This faith simplifies and speeds the design process as there is no need to waste time consulting behavior experts. Sliding by psychological issues preserves autonomy and decision-making power. If behavioral professionals were to serve in an advisory capacity, mission directors would have to share control, or at least seriously consider the opinion of behavioral experts. Why should managers complicate their task by bringing more players—psychologists, psychiatrists, anthropologists, human factors experts—to the table?For astronauts, the stereotype of the right stuff helps maintain flight status.21 It deters snooping and prying that might suggest a real or imagined blemish that could lead to mission disqualification, a most undesirable personal consequence. After all, part of the heroic myth is that under the greatest of adversities, people with the right stuff can still get the job done! Why risk all by getting involved in a research program that could lead to new reasons for disqualification? George Low, manager of Project Apollo, advised subordinates that identity issues, past or present, were
19. R. D. Launius, “Heroes in a Vacuum: The Apollo Astronaut as Cultural Icon” (American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics [AIAA] Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, 13 January 2005), p. 4.20. Ibid., p. 4.21. P. A. Santy, Choosing the Right Stuff: The Psychological Selection of Astronauts and Cosmonauts (Westport, CT: Praeger/Greenwood Publishing Group, 1994).
24Behavioral Health
off-limits and that personal hang-ups should be put aside in favor of the mission.22 Michael Collins and his colleagues liked the John Wayne–type image created for the early astronauts and did not want it tarnished.23 Flying in space was a macho, masculine endeavor, and there were those who made an effort to reserve the term “astronaut” for men, referring to women who sought to fly in space as “astronau-trix,” “astro-nettes,” “feminauts,” and “space girls.”24Marc Shepanek points out that today’s astronauts are very much aware of the possible effects of stress, boredom, and many other factors on safety, performance, and quality of life in space.25 He notes that while many of them favor research on these topics, not all stand ready to volunteer as test subjects. The concern is that despite strong assurances of confidentiality, one of the results of their participation could be disqualification. This means that operational psychologists cannot also conduct research: the role of the therapist or consulting organizational psychologist must remain sacrosanct with no hints of dual allegiance to research.26 Many kinds of workers, including those in the military and law enforcement, worry about breaches of confidentiality that have adverse repercussions on their careers. Worries about a breach of confidentiality are periodically reinforced by officials who release infor-mation despite assurances to the contrary.Efforts to protect the astronauts’ image are evident in the cordon that NASA public relations and legal teams establish to prevent outsiders from obtaining poten-tially damaging information, the micromanagement of astronauts’ public appear-ances, and the great care with which most astronauts comport themselves in public. Even today, there are topics that are considered “too hot” to be included in other-wise comprehensive and informed discussions.
22. K. McQuaid, “Race, Gender and Space Exploration: A Chapter in the Social History of the Space Age,” Journal of American Studies 41, no. 2 (2007): 405–434.23. Weitekamp, Right Stuff, Wrong Sex.24. Ibid., p. 78.25. M. Shepanek, “Human Behavioral Research in Space: Quandaries for Research Subjects and Researchers,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B25–B30.26. C. F. Flynn, “An Operational Approach to Long-Duration Mission Behavioral Health and Performance Factors,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B42–B51.
25Psychology of Space Exploration
“The right stuff” is an abstraction or ideal type that living, breathing human astronauts approximate but do not fully attain. By the beginning of the 21st cen-tury, cracks began to appear in this image. Researchers had long noted behavioral problems in spaceflightlike environments and worried about what might happen during future space missions. Hints of problems came from the Russian space pro-gram, which seemed more attuned to the significance of psychological issues. For Americans, conditions that had been heralded since the 1960s became realities in the 1990s when U.S. astronauts joined Russian cosmonauts on Mir, living and working in space for prolonged periods of time with peers from a very different culture. A few astronauts described some of the behavioral challenges that they encountered in space: maintaining high performance in the face of extreme dan-ger, loneliness, and minor conflicts with other crewmembers.27 On the debit side of the balance sheet, members of isolated and confined groups frequently report sleep disturbances, somatic complaints (aches, pains, and a constellation of flu-like symptoms sometimes known as the “space crud”), heart palpitations, anxiety, mood swings including mild depression, inconsistent motivation, and performance decrements. Crewmembers sometimes withdraw from one another, get into con-flicts with each other, or get into disputes with Mission Control. Eugene Cernan reports that the conflicts between the Apollo 7 crew and Mission Control were so severe that the astronauts never flew again.28 Both Bryan Burrough and Al Holland have described some of the difficulties that U.S. astronauts experienced on Mir.29 Burrough writes that Soyuz 21 (1976), Soyuz T-14 (1985), and Soyuz TM-2 (1987) were shortened because of mood, performance, and interpersonal issues. Brian Harvey wrote that psychological factors contributed to the early evac-uation of a Salyut 7 crew.30 U.S. researchers and flight surgeons have acknowledged instances of fear, anxiety, depression, sleep disorders, cognitive changes, somatiza-
27. B. Burrough, Dragonfly: NASA and the Crisis On Board Mir (New York: Harper Collins, 1998).28. E. Cernan and D. Davis, The Last Man on the Moon: Astronaut Eugene Cernan and America’s Race to Space (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1999).29. Burrough, Dragonfly; A. W. Holland, “Psychology of Spaceflight,” Journal of Human Performance in Extreme Environments 5, no. 1 (2000): 4.30. B. Harvey, The New Russian Space Program: From Competition to Cooperation (Chichester, U.K.: Wiley Praxis, 1996).
26Behavioral Health
tion, impulsive behaviors, social withdrawal, cultural misunderstandings, interper-sonal frictions, and anger directed toward Mission Control. After their return, some astronauts reported depression, substance abuse issues, marital discord, and jealou-sy.31 Astronauts are highly competent, task-oriented people, who, like other highly functional adults, have the normal ups and downs in their moods and social rela-tionships. And, as in the case of other highly functional adults, these ups and downs can sometimes reduce their effectiveness and relationships.It is not only the normal ups and downs of the individual astronaut that affect the teams and their work, but also the pressures and occasionally dysfunctional dynamics of the organization and Mission Control. The Mercury astronauts lobbied aggressively to fly as pilots rather than to ride as mere passengers (“Spam in a can”) whose spacecraft were controlled from the ground.32 H. S. F. Cooper wrote a well-publicized account of conflict between the Skylab 4 crew and Mission Control.33 At the heart of the matter was the overprogramming of the astronauts’ time. As psy-chologist Karl Weick described the situation:
To get the most information from this final trip in the Apollo pro-gram, ground control in Houston had removed virtually all the slack from the astronauts’ schedule of activities and had treated the men as if they were robots. To get everything in, ground control short-ened meal times, reduced setup times for experiments, and made no allowance for the fact that previous crews aboard Skylab had stowed equipment in an unsystematic manner. The astronauts’ favorite pas-times—watching the sun and earth—were forbidden.34
31. Flynn, “An Operational Approach”; Shepanek, “Human Behavioral Research in Space”; P. Suedfeld, “Invulnerability, Coping, Salutogenesis, Integration: The Four Phases of Space Psychology,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B3–B12.32. Wolfe, The Right Stuff.33. Cooper, A House in Space.34. K. E. Weick, “Organizational Design: Organizations as Self-Designing Systems,” Organizational Dynamics (Autumn 1977): 31.
27Psychology of Space Exploration
Thus, on 27 December 1973, the Skylab 4 astronauts conducted a daylong “sit-down strike.” Cooper described the crew pejoratively as hostile, irritable, and down-right grumpy, while other writers have described the “strike” as a legitimate reaction to overwork.35 William K. Douglas, a NASA flight surgeon, lamented both Cooper’s emotionally toned reporting and people’s willingness to focus on others’ real or imagined failures while overlooking greatness.36 Whatever the “spin” on this partic-ular event, the lessons are clear: the same rapid pace that can be sustained for brief sprints cannot be sustained for marathons. Give astronauts the flexibility to sched-ule their own activities, and allow time to look out the windows. NASA appears to have taken the lesson to heart. In 2002, Space.com’s Todd Halvorson conducted an interview with enthusiastic ISS astronaut Susan Helms. “It’s not that the crew isn’t busy maintaining the station, testing the remote manipulator and conducting science, it’s that there remains enough time to look out the window, do somersaults in weightlessness, watch movies, and sit around chatting.”37Spaceflight also offers opportunities for psychological growth and develop-ment.38 Training for and working in space allows people to develop their abilities, gain a strong sense of accomplishment, and feel worthwhile. There is unparal-leled challenge, the opportunity to redefine one’s place in the cosmos. There is the exhilarating feeling, as Harrison Schmitt wrote, of actually “being there.”39 Walter Cunningham wrote, “It has caused me to seek a challenge wherever I can find one, to charge ahead and never look back . . . that feeling of omnipotence is worth all that it takes to get there.”40 Many of the two dozen or so astronauts and cosmo-
35. M. M. Connors, A. A. Harrison, and F. R. Akins, Living Aloft: Human Requirements for Extended Spaceflight (Washington, DC: NASA SP-483, 1985).36. William K. Douglas, “Psychological and Sociological Aspects of Manned Spaceflight,” in From Antarctica to Outer Space, ed. Harrison et al., pp. 81–88.37. T. Halvorson, “ISS Astronaut Susan Helms: Space Is More Than a Nice Place to Visit,” available at http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/missions/iss_freetime_010615.html, 15 June 2001 (accessed 23 June 2010).38. A. A. Harrison and J. E. Summit, “How Third Force Psychology Might View Humans in Space,” Space Power 10 (1991): 85–203.39. H. Schmidt, “The Millennium Project,” in Strategies for Mars: A Guide for Human Exploration, ed. C. Stoker and C. Emmart (San Diego: American Astronautical Society/Univelt, 1996), p. 37.40. W. Cunningham, The All-American Boys (New York: Macmillan, 1977), p. 27.
28Behavioral Health
nauts interviewed by Frank White reported “overview effects,” truly transformative experiences including senses of wonder and awe, unity with nature, transcendence, and universal brotherhood.41 More recent testimonials concerning the psycholog-ical benefits of life in space come from Apollo 14 astronaut Edgar Mitchell and Shuttle-Mir astronaut-cosmonaut Jerry Linenger.42 Astronauts and cosmonauts like the sense of adventure, camaraderie, and grandeur in space.43We find hints of long-term physical and mental health benefits to life in chal-lenging environments. For example, a long-term followup study of Navy person-nel who had wintered in Antarctica revealed that following their return, they had undergone fewer hospitalizations than their peers who had identical qualifications but whose orders to go to the South Pole were rescinded as the result of an arbitrary administrative decision.44 Studies of the mental health of cosmonauts conducted two or three years after their return to Earth found that they had become less anx-ious, hypochondriacal, depressive, and aggressive.45 The most plausible explanation is that during their stay in tough environments, people develop coping skills, that is, ways of dealing with challenge and stress that continue to serve them well long after they have returned from their expedition.It was about the time astronauts began traveling on Mir and the ISS that greater evidence of psychology began to show in the U.S. space program. NASA’s Bioastronautics Critical Path Roadmap (BCPR) is one piece of evidence. Bioastronautics was NASA’s shorthand for life in space, and the BCPR was a frame-work for identifying the knowledge that NASA needs for future space missions.46 It identified and assigned priorities to the biomedical and behavioral questions that must be addressed (and the kinds of countermeasures that must be designed) for
41. F. White, The Overview Effect (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987).42. E. Mitchell and D. Williams, The Way of the Explorer (New York: Putnam, 1996); J. M. Linenger, Off the Planet (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000).43. Suedfeld, “Invulnerability, Coping, Salutogenesis, Integration.”44. L. A. Palinkas, “Group Adaptation and Individual Adjustment in Antarctica: A Summary of Recent Research,” in From Antarctica to Outer Space, ed. Harrison et al., pp. 239–252.45. V. I. Myasnikov and I. S. Zamaletdinov, “Psychological States and Group Interaction of Crew Members in Flight,” in Humans in Spaceflight, ed. C. L. Huntoon, V. Antipov, and A. I. Grigoriev, vol. 3, bk. 2 (Reston, VA: AIAA, 1996), pp. 419–431.46. Bioastronautics Critical Path Roadmap, available at http://bioastroroadmap.nasa.gov/index.jsp (accessed 30 March 2008).
29Psychology of Space Exploration
Space Station, lunar, and Mars missions. The BCPR represented a major invest-ment of time and energy, of soliciting and responding to expert advice, and of building consensus. It recognized that NASA’s organizational chart was not iso-morphic with the way that research is traditionally organized and tried assidu-ously to address crucial gaps. The BCPR was a useful mechanism for organizing biomedical and behavioral research and fostered research that yielded operation-ally relevant results. Most importantly, it represented a higher level of “buy-in” to behavioral research on the part of the space agency. Recently, the BCPR has evolved into the Human Research Program. As of January 2010, six elements com-pose the Human Research Program. They are the International Space Station Medical Project, Space Radiation, Human Health Countermeasures, Exploration Medical Capability, Behavioral Health and Performance, and Space Human Factors and Habitability.47 As the mission of NASA changes, the exact delineation of the Human Research Program may also change.Also coincident with turn-of-the-millennium space station missions was the initiation of the National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI), a consor-tium of universities and businesses dedicated to solving the problems of astronauts who are undertaking long-duration missions. The NSBRI is best viewed as tightly networked centers of excellence. Members of affiliated organizations form interdis-ciplinary teams that cut across organizational boundaries and draw strength from one another. The Institute also provides workshops and retreats for investigators who are working under the NSBRI umbrella.Many of the research interests represented in the NSBRI are clearly biomed-ical—for example, bone and muscle loss, immune disorders, and radiation effects. Other teams include neurobehavioral and psychosocial factors and human perfor-mance. For instance, there are studies of crew composition, structure, communi-cation, and leadership style. Also, there is research on methods to prevent sleep loss, promote wakefulness, reduce human error, and optimize mental and physical performance during long-duration spaceflight. Whereas many organizations hope to extrapolate studies of Earth-bound populations to astronauts and cosmonauts,
47. Human Research Program Evidence Book, available at http://humanresearch.jsc.nasa.gov/elements/smo/hrp_evidence_book.asp (accessed 23 June 2010); NASA, Human Research Program, available at http://humanresearch.jsc.nasa.gov/about.asp (accessed 25 March 2008).
30Behavioral Health
NSBRI partners hope that their research on spacefarers and analogs will benefit people on Earth.In 2003, NASA commissioned a workshop on spaceflight behavioral health. The primary purpose of this workshop was to bring together researchers and prac-titioners in an effort to identify research gaps and produce an archival record for use by managers, established behavioral health researchers, and newcomers to the field.48 Also, and perhaps most important since the mid-1990s, astronauts have begun to respond to questionnaires on such topics as noise levels and communica-tion.49 Astronauts have taken part in flight studies involving sleep and circadian rhythms and have taken self-administered tests of cognitive ability, maintained diaries, and provided other information from orbit.50 Compared to those of earlier years, many of today’s astronauts are more willing to participate in ground-based and in-flight studies, given proper assurances of confidentiality.We suggest that the NASA-Mir missions opened a window of opportunity for fruitful reevaluation of the role of behavior, including psychosocial adaptation, in U.S. space missions. When extended-duration missions moved from the abstract and theoretical to the real and some astronauts broached topics like risk, loneliness, and culture conflicts, psychological factors were brought into sharp focus. In pol-icy studies, a window of opportunity opens when a major, unexpected catastrophe (known as a focusing event) becomes known to policy-makers and the public at the same time.51 Certainly, minor problems on Mir were far removed from catastrophic,
48. A. A. Harrison, “New Directions in Spaceflight Behavioral Health: A Workshop Integrating Research and Application,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B3–B12.49. A. D. Kelly and N. Kanas, “Crewmember Communications in Space: A Survey of Astronauts and Cosmonauts,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 63 (1992): 721–726; A. D. Kelly and N. Kanas, “Leisure Time Activities in Space: A Survey of Astronauts and Cosmonauts,” Acta Astronautica 32 (1993): 451–457; A. D. Kelly and N. Kanas, “Communication Between Space Crews and Ground Personnel: A Survey of Astronauts and Cosmonauts,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 64 (1993): 795–800.50. M. M. Mallis and C. W. DeRoshia, “Circadian Rhythms, Sleep, and Performance in Space,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B94–B107; R. L. Kane, P. Short, W. E. Sipes, and C. F. Flynn, “Development and Validation of the Spaceflight Cognitive Assessment Tool for Windows (WinSCAT),” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B183–B191.51. T. A. Birkland, “Focusing Events, Mobilization, and Agenda Setting,” Journal of Public Policy 18, no. 1 (1997): 53–74.
3132
Psychology of Space Exploration
but behavioral issues gained salience and became known to NASA officials and the public at the same time. The astronauts’ experiences on Mir opened a window that generated interest in spaceflight behavioral health.In 1984, Robert Helmreich pointed out that in contrast to Americans, the Russians seemed to have always maintained a certain degree of interest in psycho-social adaptation.52 He reprinted several quotes from cosmonauts showing interest in psychosocial adjustment, group dynamics, and related topics, and he pointed to the publication of a collection of papers on space psychology by Petrov, Lomov, and Samsonov.53 Nick Kanas and his associates have written extensively on the role of psychology in the Soviet and then Russian space programs and have highlighted the potential value of this research for NASA.54 By the mid-1980s, Oleg Gazenko, head of Soviet space medicine, concluded that the limitations of living in space are not medical, but psychological.55 Quotes from cosmonaut diaries and Soviet/Russian reports remain popular for illustrating the importance of stress, mental health, crew dynamics, and the like, in part because for a long time, neither NASA support personnel nor astronauts themselves freely commented on such issues.In the early 1970s, there were only three crewed missions, and then America’s “House in Space,” Skylab, was abandoned. The United States invested in the Shuttle, which supports fairly large crews, but for only short times in space. America expected a space station, but it was not approved until 1984, and the station itself underwent several iterations (Space Station, Space Station Alpha, and Space Station Freedom) before becoming the ISS. The Soviets, on the other hand, moved directly into the era of Salyut and Mir space station missions. For them, extended-duration missions—and focusing events in the area of behavioral health—became
52. R. L. Helmreich, “Applying Psychology to Outer Space: Unfulfilled Promises Revisited,” American Psychologist 38 (1983): 445–450; Santy, Choosing the Right Stuff.53. B. N. Petrov, B. F. Lomov, and N. D. Samsonov, eds., Psychological Problems of Spaceflight (Moscow: Nauka Press, 1979).54. N. Kanas, “Psychosocial Factors Affecting Simulated and Actual Space Missions,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 56, no. 8 (August 1985): 806–811; N. Kanas, “Psychosocial Support for Cosmonauts,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 62, no. 4 (August 1991): 353–355; N. Kanas, V. P. Salnitskiy, J. B. Ritsher, V. I. Gushin, D. S. Weiss, S. A. Saylor, O. P. Kozerenko, and C. R. Marmar, “Human Interactions in Space: ISS vs. Shuttle/Mir,” Acta Astronautica 59 (2006): 413–419.55. J. E. Oberg and A. R. Oberg, Pioneering the Space Frontier (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986).Behavioral Health
a reality decades ago. As Connors and her associates wrote in 1986, “The Russians have experienced longer spaceflights than their American counterparts and have given considerable attention to ways of maintaining individuals’ psychologi-cal health and high morale in space . . . . In the Soviet Union, the Group for Psychological Support is an acknowledged and welcomed component of the ground team. Concern over such issues as intragroup compatibility and the effects of bore-dom on productivity seem to be actively studied by cosmonauts and psychologists alike. There appears to be little if any loss of status associated with confirmation of psychological or social problems associated with confinement in space.”56Thus, Russians had to confront in the 1970s issues that became pressing for Americans two decades later. As a result, when looking for models for a psycholog-ical support program, NASA turned to the Russian program to support cosmonauts on Mir.57 It is interesting that America’s international partners in space—European as well as Japanese—share the Russians’ interest in spaceflight psychology.58
ASTRONAUT SELECTION
NASA, chartered as a civilian space agency, initially intended to select Mercury astronauts from a relatively broad range of explorers: military and com-mercial aviators; mountain climbers; polar explorers; bathysphere operators; and other fit, intelligent, highly motivated individuals who had demonstrated capabili-ties for venturing into dangerous new areas. Strong pressure from the White House limited the pool to military test pilots.59 This was a group of accomplished fliers, many of whom had braved death during war. They brought with them the sharp wits, relentless motivation, and strong emotional control that characterize pilots who are willing to push themselves and their aircraft to (and sometimes beyond)
56. M. M. Connors, A. A. Harrison, and F. R. Akins, “Psychology in the Resurgent Space Program,” American Psychologist 41, no. 8 (August 1986): 906–913.57. W. E. Sipes and S. T. Vander Ark, “Operational Behavioral Health and Performance Resources for International Space Station Crews and Families,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B3.58. Santy, Choosing the Right Stuff.59. Ibid.
33Psychology of Space Exploration
the limits. Furthermore, because they were under military command, they were used to taking orders and were already cleared for top-secret technology. Mercury can-didates had to be under 40 years of age, have graduated from college with a bach-elor’s degree in science or engineering, have logged at least 1,500 hours flying jet planes, and have graduated from test pilot school. Of course, they were expected to be free of disease or illness and to demonstrate resistance to the physical stressors of spaceflight, such as temperature extremes and rapid acceleration and decelera-tion. To fit in the cramped confines of the Mercury capsule, their height could not exceed 5 feet 9 inches. The first astronauts had five duties: survive, perform effec-tively, add reliability to the automated system, complement instrument and satel-lite observation with scientific human observation, and improve the flight system through human engineering capabilities.60The initial Mercury project used two psychological approaches to selection. One was the industrial-organizational model of select-in characteristics empha-sizing astronaut proficiencies needed to successfully complete mission tasks. The second was the psychiatric-clinical psychology model of select-out characteristics. As Robert Voas and Raymond Zedekar point out, psychological qualifications fell into two categories: abilities and personality.61 In terms of aptitude and ability, they include high intelligence, general scientific knowledge and research skills, a good understanding of engineering, knowledge of operational procedures for aircraft and missiles, and psychomotor skills such as those used to operate aircraft. As regards personality, astronauts were to demonstrate a strong motivation to participate in the program, high tolerance for stress, good decision-making skills, emotional matu-rity, and the ability to work with others.At that time, of 508 military test pilots, 110 met the general requirements and 69 were considered highly qualified. These were invited to the Pentagon for a brief-ing and interviews. Then, 32 were sent to the Lovelace clinic for an extraordinary physical exam and, after certification at Lovelace, to Wright Air Development Center in Dayton, Ohio, for tests of performance under stress. Here, the candidates were subjected to vibration, acceleration and deceleration, sitting with their feet
60. M. M. Link, Space Medicine in Project Mercury (Washington, DC: NASA, 1965).61. R. Voas and R. Zedekar, “Astronaut Selection and Training,” chap. 10 in Mercury Project Summary Including the Results of the Fourth Manned Orbital Flight, May 15 and 16, 1963 (Washington, DC: Office of Scientific and Technical Information, NASA, October 1963).
34Behavioral Health
in tubs of ice water, and numerous psychological and psychiatric evaluations. They completed 13 tests on personality and motivation, and another dozen or so on intel-ligence and aptitudes. NASA historians offer the following observation:
Two of the more interesting personality and motivation studies seemed like parlor games at first, until it became evident how pro-found an exercise in Socratic introspection was implied by con-scientious answers to the test questions “Who am I” and “Whom would you assign to the mission if you could not go yourself?” . . . . Candidates who proceeded this far in the selection process all agreed with the one who complained “Nothing is sacred any more.”62
After five Mercury flights, NASA officials decided that, given the absence of serious performance deficits to date, there was no need to continue exhaustive testing procedures. Although ongoing research would have provided an excellent basis for refining selection methods, by the end of 1962, NASA had prohibited research teams from collecting data on astronaut job performance, thus making it impossible to validate selection methods. At that point, according to Patricia Santy’s authoritative work, Choosing the Right Stuff: The Psychological Assessment of Astronauts and Cosmonauts, normal reluctance to participate in psychological research was transformed into “outright hostility.”63 Psychiatric and psychological data from the Mercury program were confiscated, and researchers were told that apart from incomplete information that had already appeared in an obscure interim report, nothing could be published about astronaut psychology. The reasons for this are not entirely clear—for example, confidentiality was a growing concern, and data that could provide a basis for invidious comparisons could work against crew morale—but Santy favors the view that “NASA became fearful that information on the psychological status and performance of their astronauts would be detrimental to the agency.”64
62. Mercury Program Overview, available at http://www-pao.ksc.nasa.gov/history/mercury/mercury-overview.htm (accessed 4 December 2007).63. Santy, Choosing the Right Stuff, p. 29.64. Ibid., p. 29.
35Psychology of Space Exploration
She also documents the minimal role that psychiatrists and psychologists played in the selection process from Gemini until well into the early Shuttle mis-sions.65 In the beginning of the astronaut program, original psychological selec-tion attempted to pick the best-qualified candidates from a very capable group of experienced pilots, but by the 1980s, the selection process simply made sure that candidates were qualified based on the evaluator’s opinion. Thus in 1983, Jones and Annes could claim that no psychological testing was involved. Rather, the approach had evolved into an entirely psychiatric process completed by two psy-chiatrists who separately interviewed each candidate. Whereas the original exam-ination sought the best-qualified candidates, later procedures simply ensured that each candidate met the minimum qualifications.66Candidates were no longer rated against one another, but they were screened for various psychopathologic conditions that could be detrimental or unsafe in a space environment. This screening, although conducted by expert aviation psychi-atrists, did not have specific and objective criteria by which to rate each candidate. The emphasis was on selecting-out those candidates whose psychological structure would be detrimental in a space environment. Neuroses, personality disorders, fear of flying, disabling phobias, substance abuse, the use of psychotropic medications, or any other psychiatric conditions that would be hazardous to flight safety or mis-sion accomplishment were among the grounds for rejection.Thus, a selection program that began in 1959 as a model rooted in psychiatry and clinical psychology, and in industrial and organizational psychology, had been reduced to subjective evaluation. Patricia Santy provides more detail on how psy-chiatric evaluations were conducted by two psychiatric consultants who did not collaborate, use a standardized psychiatric interview, or keep detailed documenta-tion, and who used their own subjective sets of psychological criteria in the course of the evaluation.67 She reviewed the percentage of female and male candidates dis-qualified psychiatrically. She found that one of the two psychiatrists hired to help in the screening process between 1977 and 1985 psychiatrically disqualified 40.7
65. Ibid.66. D. R. Jones and C. A. Annes, “The Evolution and Present Status of Mental Health Standards for Selection of USAF Candidates for Space Missions,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 54 (1983): 730–734.67. Santy, Choosing the Right Stuff.
36Behavioral Health
percent of the female candidates and 7.5 percent of the male candidates. However, since no specific documentation existed, there was no way to know the reasoning behind his decisions.68 This is not to say that the psychiatric consultants did a poor job of selecting-out; because no validation studies were completed, there is no evi-dence by which to evaluate their work.Under the leadership of psychiatrist Patricia Santy and psychologist Al Holland in the 1980s, and then, in the 1990s, psychiatrist Christopher Flynn, there was a gradual return to evidence- and normative-based astronaut selection. In 1988, a biobehavioral research laboratory was formed within the Space Biomedical Research Institute (SBRI), which at that time was a branch of NASA’s Medical Sciences Division, along with Medical Operations. Michael Bungo headed SBRI; Patricia Santy was the director of the laboratory; and psychologist Al Holland became her deputy. The Biobehavioral Laboratory was to develop a new work-ing group of psychologists and psychiatrists to make recommendations on both the operational and research needs in the areas of the behavioral sciences. At that time, operations were expanding beyond helping to choose astronauts to providing psy-chological support for the astronaut corps.The development of standardized, semistructured interviews and diagnos-tic criteria, aided by the work done by the Working Group on Psychiatric and Psychological Selection of Astronauts, resulted in a rewrite of NASA psychiatric standards based on the then-current American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual III and recommendations for a select-in process.69 The rea-soning behind the select-in process harkened back to the original logic of 1959, hypothesizing that certain psychological traits were associated with effective astro-naut performance. Commencing in 1989, validation work on the select-in criteria was begun. In describing the selection process, Laura Galarza and Al Holland note that selection starts at the time of entry into the astronaut corps, then should con-tinue through the training process and include selection for designated missions.70
68. Ibid.69. Ibid.70. L. Galarza and A. W. Holland, “Selecting Astronauts for Long-Duration Missions” (SAE International Document 1999-01-2097, presented at the International Conference on Environmental Systems, Denver, CO, July 1999); L. Galarza and A. W. Holland, “Critical Astronaut Proficiencies Required for Long-Duration Space Flight” (SAE International
37Psychology of Space Exploration
In the 1990s, Galarza and Holland began developing a scientifically defensi-ble select-in process that would screen for personal abilities to help people live and work within small teams under conditions of isolation and confinement.71 By using highly qualified subject-matter experts, job analysis, and documented validation techniques, they sought to meet the high standards for selection established by the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychologists (SIOP).72 Although these researchers developed a profile of needed knowledge, skills, and abilities, NASA’s prohibition against obtaining in-training or on-the-job performance ratings effec-tively killed any longitudinal or predictive validation of the proposed astronaut select-in procedures. Today, all astronaut candidate applicants spend several hours completing psychological tests and then undergo extensive psychological and psy-chiatric interviews. To prevent coaching, the specific tests and interview content are not publicly available. The current selection process resembles the selection procedures for other high-risk jobs and incorporates highly validated tests that are quantitatively scored, along with in-depth, semistructured interviews.Well before Apollo astronauts set foot on the Moon, there were political pres-sures to increase the diversity of the astronaut corps by including women and repre-sentatives of different racial and ethnic groups. Accommodating people with different cultural backgrounds became a practical matter in the Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, in the course of the Russian “guest cosmonaut” program, in Shuttle missions with inter-national crews, and, of course, aboard the ISS. Successfully managing cultural, occu-pational, and other differences in space is likely to become even more crucial as highly trained professionals are joined by industrial workers and tourists.Margaret Weitekamp recounts how, at the inception of Project Mercury, an Air Force flight surgeon, Don Flickenger, helped initiate a program known as WISE—Women in Space Earliest.73 Women offered certain potential advantages over men; one of the most notable of these was their smaller size (and reduced life-support requirements), which would make them easier to lift into orbit and keep alive at
Document 1999-01-2096, presented at the International Conference on Environmental Systems, Denver, CO, July 1999).71. Ibid.72. Society of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Principles for the Validation and Use of Personnel Selection Procedures (Washington, DC: SIOP, 2003).73. Weitekamp, Right Stuff, Wrong Sex.
3839
Behavioral Health
a time when engineers had to fret every extra pound of weight. After word of the program’s existence leaked, it was abandoned by the Air Force and taken over by Dr. Randall Lovelace, of the same Lovelace Clinic that conducted the physicals for project Mercury. Aviatrix Jackie Cochran and her wealthy philanthropist husband, Floyd Odlum, provided funding so that Lovelace could put the women through the same rigorous evaluation. Of the 25 women who took the physical, 13 passed. The next step in the process, which involved centrifuges and jet flights, depended on the availability of military facilities and equipment. Although it appeared that the procedures could be done at the Naval Air Station in Pensacola, Florida, the abil-ity to do so depended on NASA’s officially “requiring” and then reimbursing the testing. Since the program was unofficial (despite widespread perceptions that it was connected with NASA), the space agency did not intervene on the women’s behalf. Some of the women continued to press for further testing and flight training, and, eventually, there was a congressional hearing, but public clamor and aggres-sive lobbying got no results. Kennedy’s decision to place a man on the Moon before the decade was finished was interpreted by NASA to mean that it could not divert resources to sending women to orbit. But there were other barriers to women’s par-ticipation in space exploration, including the inability of some of the people in NASA’s white-male-dominated culture to conceive of women in the “masculine” role of astronaut. Weitekamp writes:
At a very basic level, it never occurred to American decision makers to seriously consider a woman astronaut. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, NASA officials and other American space pol-icy makers remained unconscious of the way their calculations implicitly incorporated postwar beliefs about men’s and women’s roles. Within the civilian space agency, the macho ethos of test piloting and military aviation remained intact. The tacit accep-tance that military jet test pilots sometimes drank too much (and often drove too fast) complemented the expectation that women wore gloves and high heels—and did not fly spaceships.74
74. Ibid., p. 3.Psychology of Space Exploration
At that time, lack of diversity at NASA was not limited to the astronaut corps. In 1974, Congress held a hearing on NASA’s Equal Employment Opportunity Program. The chairman’s introductory remarks included the statement “It is clear that the NASA equal employment opportunity effort over the years has been inad-equate . . . .”75 In the congressional report, NASA admitted that as of the end of fiscal year (FY) 1971, of all NASA employees, only 16.6 percent were women and 4.6 percent minorities.76 Only 3 percent of the supervisors and 2.4 percent of the engineers were women.Kim McQuaid points out that many forces worked against increasing the pro-portion of women and blacks at NASA.77 Nationally, efforts to increase diversity through new employment strategies began at about the same time as NASA flour-ished in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Special hurdles at NASA included an organizational culture that was built on the white-male stereotypes of the time and demanded prior training and experience in science and engineering at a time when very few women or minorities were earning (or were allowed to earn) degrees in science and engineering. In 1973, then–NASA Administrator James Fletcher hired Ruth Bates Harris as a high-level deputy director to oversee NASA’s equal opportunity employment processes—but, when it turned out that she would be a fearless leader rather than a compliant bureaucrat, he fired her and then, under pressure, attempted to rehire her at a lower level. This initiated bad press, conflicts with Congress, and a series of internal struggles that brought about diversification. In the 1990s, Administrator Dan Goldin could complain that NASA was still too male, pale, and stale, although, two decades earlier, NASA had responded to new domestic political issues by changing from a civil rights sham to the beginnings of a demonstrably effective, if imperfect, affirmative action program.Aside from the 1965 selection cycle, when the National Academy of Sciences handled selection and allowed women to apply (none were accepted), it was not until the Shuttle era that women were added to the astronaut corps. On 16 January
75. House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Civil Rights and Constitutional Rights, NASA’s Equal Opportunity Program, hearings before the Subcommittee on the Judiciary, 93rd Congress, 2nd session, 13–14 March 1974, p. 1.76. Ibid., p. 13.77. Kim McQuaid, “Race, Gender and Space Exploration: A Chapter in the Social History of the Space Age,” Journal of American Studies 41, no. 2 (2007): 405–434.
40Behavioral Health
1978, the first female and black candidates were selected; only a few years later, in 1983, the public wildly acclaimed mission specialist Sally Ride’s orbital flight aboard Challenger. Some of the women who had participated in the informal wom-en’s astronaut selection program of the early 1960s felt vindicated in 1995, when they watched pilot Eileen Collins lift off, carrying their dreams with her.78 Today, female astronauts routinely participate in Shuttle and Space Station missions in many different roles. Despite the long road that American women and minorities traveled to prove their worth, the U.S. experience has shown that talented women and minorities, given no special treatment because of gender or ethnicity, are as adept as their white, male colleagues in the world of space.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SUPPORT
Initially, psychological support for astronauts came from helpful flight surgeons, flak-catchers who tried to minimize interference on the part of the media and the public, as well as cheering family and friends. By means of shortwave radio, astronauts on the ground encouraged astronauts in orbit. It is clear from Wolfe’s The Right Stuff that the astronauts’ wives provided strong support for one another, as well as for their husbands.79 The larger community of astronauts and their families still provides psy-chological support for astronauts before, during, and after their flights.Professional psychological support for the astronauts and their families evolved over time and gained momentum in the early space station era.80 Today, psycho-logical support is provided in three stages: preflight, in-flight, and postflight.81
78. Weitekamp, Right Stuff, Wrong Sex, p. 188.79. Wolfe, The Right Stuff.80. E. Fiedler and F. E. Carpenter, “Evolution of the Behavioral Health Sciences Branch of the Space Medicine and Health Care Systems at the Johnson Space Center,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B31–B35; Flynn, “An Operational Approach to Long-Duration Mission Behavioral Health and Performance Factors”; N. Kanas and D. Manzey, Space Psychology and Psychiatry (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer, 2003).81. W. E. Sipes and E. Fiedler, “Current Psychological Support for US Astronauts on the International Space Station” (paper presented at “Tools for Psychological Support During Exploration Missions to Mars and Moon,” European Space Research and Technology Centre [ESTEC], Noordwijk, Netherlands, 26 March 2007).
41Psychology of Space Exploration
The NASA and Wyle Operational Psychology team, under the leadership of the Behavioral Health and Performance Group/Space Medicine, NASA, offers pre-flight training and briefings in such diverse areas as self-care, conflict management and cultural awareness, and field training. Family readiness is addressed in a brief-ing focused on the astronaut’s spouse to explain processes such as crew care pack-ages and private family conferences. Crew care packages are containers of personal items from family and friends that are sent via Russian Soyuz supply missions and U.S. Space Shuttle missions to astronauts residing on the ISS. Favorite foods, sur-prise gifts from the family, and holiday decorations are a few of the items that have been sent to the ISS in these shipments.During the flight stage, in addition to the crew care packages and private weekly videoconferences with families, psychological support services include extensive communication with people on the ground (including Mission Control person-nel, relatives, and friends), psychological support hardware and software, special events such as surprise calls from celebrities, and semimonthly videos with a behav-ioral health clinician. Astronauts in flight have e-mail accessibility and can use an Internet protocol phone on board the ISS to call back to Earth. As in the past, ham radio allows contact between the ISS and schools throughout the world.A month before their return to Earth, ISS astronauts are briefed on the stresses and joys of returning home following the deployment. Postflight, there are a series of debriefings intended to benefit the astronaut and fine-tune the psychological sup-port program. The astronaut’s spouse is given the opportunity to meet with opera-tional psychological support personnel to provide the latter with feedback on the psychological support provided during the mission. Of course, astronauts and their families can use counseling psychological support services at any time. While this briefly covers the current state of the art of psychological support for astronauts on the ISS, psychological support for lunar and Mars missions may have greater con-straints and force a return to the mindset of earlier explorers and their families.
CONCLUSION
Spaceflight is both demanding and rewarding, and for many years, psychol-ogists focused on the demanding environment and stressful effects. Throughout the history of spaceflight, psychologists, psychiatrists, and many other professionals
42Behavioral Health
have expressed concern that the physical, psychological, and interpersonal stress-ors of spaceflight could endanger a crew, undercut performance, and lower the qual-ity of life. Episodes in spaceflight-analogous environments and a few incidents in space suggest that although no astronauts have been recalled to Earth on the basis of psychological and social challenges, adaptation must be taken into account. Astronaut participation in extended-duration missions, the prospects of a return to the Moon, continuing public enthusiasm for a mission to Mars, the reformula-tion of research questions following the publication of Safe Passage, and the coevo-lution of NASA’s Bioastronautics Critical Path Roadmap and the National Space Biomedical Research Institute initiated a new era for psychology. According to our analysis, since the dawn of the modern space station era, there has been an increase in both research and operational interest in spaceflight behavioral health. Slowly, and perhaps painfully, psychology has gained greater recognition within the U.S. space program, and there is a growing convergence of interests to target research at operational problems.82Current NASA administration has mandated that human research be oper-ationally relevant. This is partly driven by funding shortages and partly by needs to meet NASA performance standards and requirements when astronauts once again venture beyond low-Earth orbit. The new Human Research Program docu-ments including the “Human Research Program Requirements Document” and the “Human Research Program Integrated Research Plan” are the bases for defining, documenting, and allocating human research program requirements as they have evolved from the older Bioastronautics Critical Path Roadmap and new NASA standards and requirements that emphasize future missions. As explained on the NASA Web site, “The Human Research Program (HRP) delivers human health and performance countermeasures, knowledge, technologies, and tools to enable safe, reliable, and productive human space exploration. This Integrated Research Plan (IRP) describes the program’s research activities that are intended to address the needs of human space exploration and serve IRP customers. The timescale of human space exploration is envisioned to take many decades. The IRP illus-
82. Albert A. Harrison, “Behavioral Health: Integrating Research and Application in Support of Exploration Missions,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B3–B12.
43Psychology of Space Exploration
trates the program’s research plan through the timescale of early lunar missions of extended duration.”83We can see the preliminary outlines of a comprehensive and continuing pro-gram in spaceflight behavioral health. A comprehensive program in spaceflight behavioral health will have to be broad-based; be interdisciplinary; and address issues at the individual, small-group, and organizational levels. It will require mul-tiple, convergent methods including archival research, field observations, and both field and laboratory experiments. Research falling under this umbrella must meet high scientific standards, achieve flight certification, and be palatable to astronauts. Only with continued interest and support from NASA—and from psychologists—will spaceflight behavioral health flourish. Long-term success will require accessi-ble, peer-reviewed publications and efforts to target young investigators to replace those who retire. An ongoing behavioral database could prove very useful. For over 15 years, David Musson, Robert Helmreich, and their associates have been devel-oping a database that includes astronauts as well as professionals who work in other demanding environments.84 As they point out, this kind of database provides many opportunities for studies in such areas as the effectiveness of recruiting and selec-tion procedures, performance changes over time, and attrition.Psychology is in a better position to be of help. Many of the theories and tools that are proving useful today were not available at the dawn of the Space Age. New (relative to 1960) resources include cognitive models, which emphasize our information processing power, and humanistic or “positive psychology” models that stress people’s positive, striving nature.85 These new models have allowed psychol-ogists a fresh take on many important issues. Human factors psychologists bene-fit from modern computer modeling technologies and increasing evidence of the importance of taking the person into account when developing a human or human-robotic system.
83. NASA Johnson Space Center, Human Research Program Integrated Research Plan, Supplement A1, Behavioral Health and Performance, 2008, available at http://humanresearch.jsc.nasa.gov/elements/smo/docs/bhp_irp_supplemental_v1.pdf (accessed 21 May 2010).84. D. M. Musson and R. L. Helmreich, “ Long-Term Personality Data Collection in Support of Spaceflight Analogue Research,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (2005): B119–B125.85. Suedfeld, “Invulnerability, Coping, Salutogenesis, Integration.”
44Behavioral Health
Research technology has changed dramatically over the past 50 years, and the new technology has also been useful for increasing psychology’s contributions to NASA. These changes are evident wherever we look, from questionnaire construc-tion to data analysis. Today, miniaturization and computer technology enable psy-chological assessments and evidence-based countermeasures that would have been impossible in the 1960s.Minimally intrusive techniques are particularly useful, and one of these is based on nonintrusive computer monitoring of facial expression.86 Another approach is mon-itoring cognitive functioning through computer analysis of speech.87 Encouraging astronauts to monitor their own behavior reduces the threat that performance lapses could lead to flight disqualification. This self-monitoring has been accomplished by means of computers and personal digital assistants (PDAs) that are programmed to measure several dimensions of cognitive functioning (attention, information pro-cessing, and recall). Astronauts may use the results of these tests to gauge their own preparedness to engage in a particular activity.88While we see evidence of an expanding role, our profession’s future in space-flight is by no means assured. NASA’s resistance to psychology is by no means fully overcome. NASA Administrators must still concern themselves with public rela-tions. Project managers and engineers must still get on with their tasks within the real constraints of cost and practicality. Astronauts remain sensitive to possible threats to flight assignments and careers. The focusing events of Mir and the ISS were less than two decades ago, and it is too early to tell if the new interest and infrastructure can withstand the vagaries of funding variations or national and orga-nizational politics.
86. D. F. Dinges, R. L. Rider, J. Dorrian, E. L. McGlinchey, N. L. Rogers, Z. Cizman, S. K. Goldenstein, C. Vogler, S. Venkartamarian, and D. N. Metaxas, “Optical Computer Recognition of Facial Expressions Associated with Stress Induced by Performance Demands,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B172–182.87. P. Lieberman, A. Morey, J. Hochstadt, M. Larson, and S. Mather, “Mount Everest: A Space Analogue for Speech Monitoring of Cognitive Deficits and Stress,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B198–B207.88. J. M. Shephard and S. M. Kosslyn, “The MiniCog Rapid Assessment Battery: A ‘Blood Pressure Cuff’ for the Mind,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76, no. 6, sect. II (June 2005): B192–B197.
45Chapter 3
From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
Sheryl L. Bishop
Department of Preventive Medicine and Community Health and School of Nursing University of Texas Medical Branch
ABSTRACT
The need to find relevant terrestrial substitutes, that is, analogs, for teams oper-ating in extraterrestrial and microgravity environments is driven by extraordinary demands for mission success. Unlike past frontiers where failure on the part of vari-ous groups to succeed represented far more limited implications for continued prog-ress within these environments, accidents like Challenger in 1986 and Columbia in 2003 underscored the magnified cost of failure for space missions. Where past human frontiers were characterized by centralized decisions to engage in exploration and development largely under the dictates of authoritarian governments or individual sponsors, the exploration of space has been significantly influenced by the general public’s perception of “acceptable risk” and fiscal worthiness. To date, space mis-sions have failed due to technological deficiencies. However, history is replete with examples of exploration and colonization that failed due to human frailties, includ-ing those that reflect failures of the group. Both historical literature and research on teams operating within extreme environments, including space, have clearly indi-cated that psychological and sociocultural factors are components critical for indi-vidual and group success. Given the limited access to the space frontier and the investment in collective effort and resources, our ability to study individual and group functioning in the actual space environment has been, and will continue to be, severely limited. Thus, studying groups in terrestrial extreme environments as analogs has been sought to provide predictive insight into the many factors that impact group performance, health, and well-being in challenging environments.This chapter provides an overview of the evolution of research utilizing ter-restrial analogs and addresses the challenges for selecting, training, and sup-porting teams for long-duration space missions. An examination of how analog
47Psychology of Space Exploration
environments can contribute to our knowledge of factors affecting functioning and well-being at both the physiological and the psychological levels will help define the focus for future research.
INTRODUCTION
Humans have long speculated about, studied, and striven to explore the heav-ens. Many of our earliest myths, such as the flight of Daedalus and Icarus too close to the Sun on wings made of wax, expressed our desire to explore beyond the bound-aries of Earth as well as our willingness to push current technology to its limits. Considerations by the earliest philosophers and scientists, including Archimedes, Galileo Galilei, Nicolaus Copernicus, Leonardo da Vinci, Sir Isaac Newton, Jules Verne, H. G. Wells, or Percival Lowell, eventually generated a whole new genre of fictional literature built upon scientific extrapolations, dubbed “science fiction,” and gave voice to their speculations about the nature of extraterrestrial environ-ments. Modern scientists and pioneers led by the Wright brothers, Robert Goddard, Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Hermann Oberth, Wernher von Braun, Sergey Korolev, Yuri Gagarin, and Neil Armstrong pushed the boundaries of knowledge about flight and extended human inquiry beyond our terrestrial boundaries into our local and extended galactic neighborhood. For serious considerations of how humans will fare in space, we have had to extrapolate from human experience on Earth in envi-ronments that challenge us in, ideally, similar ways. However, the search for space analog environments in which to systematically study individual and group adap-tation has had to grapple with some significant limitations, i.e., the impossibility of a substitute for a microgravity or reduced-gravity environment or environments that holistically mimic radiation profiles and their inherent danger for those beyond Earth’s magnetic field. Since there is no direct equivalent for space, all analog envi-ronments are simulations of greater or lesser fidelity along varying dimensions of interest. Some analog environments provide extremely good characterizations of expected challenges in testing equipment or hardware, e.g., environmental cham-bers such as the Space Shuttle mock-ups of the various decks or the cargo bay in NASA’s Weightless Environmental Training Facility (WET-F), but lack any rel-evance to assessing how human operators will fare psychologically or as a team. Others, like chamber studies, address important components of human adaptation,
48Psychology of Space Exploration
environments can contribute to our knowledge of factors affecting functioning and well-being at both the physiological and the psychological levels will help define the focus for future research.
INTRODUCTION
Humans have long speculated about, studied, and striven to explore the heav-ens. Many of our earliest myths, such as the flight of Daedalus and Icarus too close to the Sun on wings made of wax, expressed our desire to explore beyond the bound-aries of Earth as well as our willingness to push current technology to its limits. Considerations by the earliest philosophers and scientists, including Archimedes, Galileo Galilei, Nicolaus Copernicus, Leonardo da Vinci, Sir Isaac Newton, Jules Verne, H. G. Wells, or Percival Lowell, eventually generated a whole new genre of fictional literature built upon scientific extrapolations, dubbed “science fiction,” and gave voice to their speculations about the nature of extraterrestrial environ-ments. Modern scientists and pioneers led by the Wright brothers, Robert Goddard, Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Hermann Oberth, Wernher von Braun, Sergey Korolev, Yuri Gagarin, and Neil Armstrong pushed the boundaries of knowledge about flight and extended human inquiry beyond our terrestrial boundaries into our local and extended galactic neighborhood. For serious considerations of how humans will fare in space, we have had to extrapolate from human experience on Earth in envi-ronments that challenge us in, ideally, similar ways. However, the search for space analog environments in which to systematically study individual and group adap-tation has had to grapple with some significant limitations, i.e., the impossibility of a substitute for a microgravity or reduced-gravity environment or environments that holistically mimic radiation profiles and their inherent danger for those beyond Earth’s magnetic field. Since there is no direct equivalent for space, all analog envi-ronments are simulations of greater or lesser fidelity along varying dimensions of interest. Some analog environments provide extremely good characterizations of expected challenges in testing equipment or hardware, e.g., environmental cham-bers such as the Space Shuttle mock-ups of the various decks or the cargo bay in NASA’s Weightless Environmental Training Facility (WET-F), but lack any rel-evance to assessing how human operators will fare psychologically or as a team. Others, like chamber studies, address important components of human adaptation,
48From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
e.g., confinement, but fail utterly to incorporate true environmental threats. Others allow for the impact of true dangerous, unpredictable environments but lack any way to systematically compare across specific environments. The spectrum of fidel-ity to space among terrestrial analogs ranges from laboratory studies where the impact of environmental threat and physical hardship, as well as true isolation and confinement, are limited and, even, sometimes absent, to real teams in real, extreme environments characterized by very little control over extraneous variables.This, then, is the challenge. Unlike the testing of hardware, where various components can be reliably evaluated separately, the study of humans, and teams in particular, is a dynamic endeavor requiring in situ study of the collective. To develop reliable protocols based on empirical evidence to select, monitor, and sup-port teams effectively in space necessarily involves the demand to study teams in analog environments that replicate a wide range of physiological, psychological, and psychosocial factors interacting both with the environment and within the team. The high degree of reliance on technology for life support, task performance, and communication must be integrated with new measurement methodologies to overcome heretofore intrusive measurement modalities. The growing frequency of multinational and multicultural teams and the demand for longer-duration mis-sions both further compound the complexity of the challenge. While the primary goal has been the insurance of human health and well-being, the expectation has been that such priorities will naturally lead to improved chances for performance and mission success. Yet achieving this goal depends largely on how well our ana-logs prepare us for living and working in space.Analogs for human individual and group performance in space has involved two basic approaches: 1) constructing an environment within a laboratory setting with maximum control over extraneous variables and utilizing volunteer research subjects or 2) studying naturally occurring real-world groups in real environments characterized by a number of confounds.1 Each comes with its own limitations and strengths. In any evaluation of the value of the analog, the pros and cons of each environment need to
1. W. Haythorn and I. Altman, “Personality Factors in Isolated Environments,” in Psychological Stress: Issues in Research, ed. M. Trumbull (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1966); J. P. Zubek, Sensory Deprivation: Fifteen Years of Research (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1969).
49Psychology of Space Exploration
be kept in mind. This is especially true when assessing the generalizability of insight of psychosocial factors from substitute environments for space.Before we began deliberately constructing controlled laboratory environments, there were the records of early expeditionary explorations into various places on Earth.2 The tradition of publishing personal diaries and mission recounts has been similarly observed by the earliest explorers of space.3 Secondary analyses of his-torical expeditions have become increasingly popular in recent years.4 The very character of natural environments typically guarantees that there will be at least some, if not substantial, periods of inaccessibility, lack of communication or con-tact, little accessibility of real-time support, and great demands on individuals and groups to engage in autonomous decision-making, problem-solving, conflict reso-lution, self-monitoring, and self-regulation. These demands inherently build in the potential for conflict with external mission support personnel and researchers who find adherence to mission schedules and timelines far easier to maintain than do those actually on the mission. Shared perspective between these groups becomes increasingly difficult to promote as mission duration, distance, and environmental demands play larger roles in daily decisions of the teams than do seemingly arbi-trary mission schedules.Measurement of these factors is compromised as teams become preoccupied with dealing with the environment, become antagonistic to external evaluation, become noncompliant with schedules that become unimportant to participants, and engage in a general reprioritization of activities that emphasizes near-term, more salient goals (e.g., personal comfort, leisure) over and above long-term mission goals (e.g., study data). Such difficulties have raised questions about the worth of studying groups in real-world environments. In actuality, these conditions are exactly what is needed to simulate space missions that have grown in duration,
2. A. Greely, Three Years of Arctic Service: An Account of the Lady Franklin Bay Expedition of 1881–1884, and the Attainment of the Farthest North (New York: Scribner, 1886); V. Stefansson, The Adventure of Wrangel Island (New York: MacMillan Company, 1925); R. Pearce, “Marooned in the Arctic: Diary of the Dominion Explorers’ Expedition to the Arctic, August to December 1929,” Northern Miner (Winnipeg, MB, 1930).3. V. Lebedev, Diary of a Cosmonaut: 211 Days in Space (College Station, TX: Phytoresource Research, Inc., 1988); J. Lovell and J. Kluger, Apollo 13 [Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13] (New York: Pocket Books, 1994).4. J. Stuster, Bold Endeavors (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1996).
50From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
distance from Earth, complexity, and challenge. However, space missions will also be, at least for the foreseeable future, characterized by an extraordinary degree of control, from selecting who goes to establishing the daily details of mission tasks and schedules—elements that are far more variable in real-world groups, such as those in Antarctica or part of polar or mountaineering expeditions. In real-world groups that have higher degrees of structure and control, such as military teams, the command and control structure is distinctly different from the current scientist-astronaut organizational structure of space missions. Fundamental differences in group structures, such as leadership and authority, represent significant elements in whether findings from terrestrial analogs translate to future space crews.The need for control over the inherent chaos of real-world environments in order to definitively identify critical factors that affect individual and group perfor-mance was the driver behind the development of constructed environments of vari-ous complexities. Useful data from such artificial environments depend on whether participants are truly immersed in the fiction of a simulation and are responding in the same way they would if the environment were real. This is the paradox researchers in analog environments face: In laboratory studies, the very attributes of the environment that have the greatest impact on performance are removed (e.g., real danger, uncontrolled events, situational ambiguity, uncertainty, or the inter-action with the extreme environment itself). If these features are compromised, as many have argued, then is there value in conducting such laboratory studies?5 On the pro side, laboratory chamber studies have provided opportunities to evaluate methods of monitoring psychological and interpersonal parameters for subsequent application during real flights and have identified issues that might cause psycho-logical and interpersonal problems in space. They have also provided empirical evi-dence for a number of behavioral issues anecdotally reported from space, e.g., the tendency of crews to direct aggression toward personnel at Mission Control.6 They
5. L. A. Palinkas, “On the ICE: Individual and Group Adaptation in Antarctica,” 2003, available at http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/anthro/bec/papers/Palinkas_On_The_Ice.pdf (accessed 12 June 2007); P. Suedfeld, “What Can Abnormal Environments Tell Us About Normal People? Polar Stations as Natural Psychological Laboratories,” Journal of Environmental Psychology 18 (1998): 95.6. N. Kanas, V. Salnitskiy, E. M. Grund, et al., “Social and Cultural Issues During Shuttle/Mir Space Missions,” Acta Astronautica 47 (2000): 647; G. M. Sandal, R. Vaernes, and H. Ursin, “Interpersonal Relations During Simulated Space Missions,” Aviation, Space, and
51Psychology of Space Exploration
are well suited to first-line inquiry when there is a need to investigate the charac-teristics of a particular phenomenon suspected of being present. However, com-plexity is a key defining trait of stressed operational environments. Total reliance on laboratory studies and the presumption of broad generalizability, particularly for research on high-stress, high-risk environments, is highly likely to lead to dissoci-ation between actual operational findings and laboratory and experimental stud-ies.7 Conversely, data on real-world groups situated in extreme environments has provided insight into a host of factors that impact group performance, health, and well-being emergent from the interaction between the individual, the team, and the environment. The differences found between studies conducted in experimen-tally controlled chambers and those conducted in messy, noisy, in situ real environ-ments appears to be due to the critical presence of real environmental threat and physical hardship, as well as true isolation and confinement, which have proven to be key factors in individual and group coping. Additionally, when comparing extreme environments with non-extreme natural environments in which people normally operate, the level, intensity, rate of change, and diversity of physical and social stimuli, as well as behavior settings and possible behaviors within an extreme environment, are far more restricted.8Thus, real teams in extreme environments have validated or corrected findings from chamber studies where critical environmental factors are typically absent or blunted. Real extreme environments allow us to examine various aspects of the psy-chophysiological relationship that are essential to fully understanding the adaptation
Environmental Medicine 66 (1995): 617; V. I. Gushin, V. A. Kolintchenko, V. A. Efimov, and C. Davies, “Psychological Evaluation and Support During EXEMSI,” in Advances in Space Biology and Medicine, ed. S. Bonting (London: JAI Press, Inc., 1996), p. 283; V. I. Gushin, T. B. Zaprisa, V. A. Kolintchenko, A. Efimov, T. M. Smirnova, A. G. Vinokhodova, and N. Kanas, “Content Analysis of the Crew Communication with External Communicants Under Prolonged Isolation,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 12 (1997): 1093.7. A. D. Baddeley, “Selecting Attention and Performance in Dangerous Environments,” British Journal of Psychology 63 (1972): 537; G. W. McCarthy, “Operational Relevance of Aeromedical Laboratory Research,” abstract no. 24 (paper presented as part of the Aerospace Medical Association’s 69th Annual Scientific Meeting, Seattle, WA, 17–21 May 1988), p. 57; J. D. Mears and P. J. Cleary, “Anxiety as a Factor in Underwater Performance,” Ergonomics 23, no. 6 (1980): 549; G. Wilson, J. Skelly, and B. Purvis, “Reactions to Emergency Situations in Actual and Simulated Flight” (presented as a paper at the Aerospace Medical Panel Symposium, The Hague, Netherlands, 1989).8. Suedfeld, “What Can Abnormal Environments Tell Us About Normal People?”: 95.
52From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
of humans to the stresses of these environments and, ultimately, to space. Space, of course, will be the final testing ground for our accumulated knowledge. But are we stuck with choosing between chamber studies and naturally occurring opportunistic teams in real extreme environments? A more recent, hybrid approach of situating research facilities within extreme environments offers a good compromise between the artificial conditions of the laboratory and the open-ended, full access of an expe-ditionary mission. When teams or individuals operate in extreme environments, their responses are more purely a product of either situational drivers or internal per-sonal characteristics. To the extent that an extreme environment is well character-ized and known, it gains in fidelity and allows more accurate inferences about key phenomena to be drawn. For these very reasons, Palinkas has strongly argued that the cumulative experience with year-round presence in Antarctica makes it an ideal laboratory for investigating the impact of seasonal variation on behavior, gaining understanding about how biological mechanisms and psychological processes inter-act, and allowing us to look at a variety of health and adaptation effects.9
PSYCHOLOGY AND SPACE
One important fact, which has emerged during decades of research, is that in the study of capsule environments there are few main effect variables. Almost every outcome is due to an interaction among a host of physical and social environmental variables and personality factors. Thus, although we conceptually deconstruct the situation into particular sources of variance, we must remem-ber that how people experience an environment is more impor-tant than the objective characteristics of the environment.10
Investigations into psychological and psychosocial adaptation to extreme envi-ronments as substitutes for space are recent phenomena. Expeditions and forays
9. Palinkas, “On the ICE.”10. P. Suedfeld and G. D. Steel, “The Environmental Psychology of Capsule Habitats,” Annual Review of Psychology 51 (2000): 230.
53Psychology of Space Exploration
into these environments have historically been for the purposes of exploration, and the primary metric of successful adaptation was survival. One could argue that chronicles such as the Iliad and the Odyssey were early examples of more recent dia-ries such as those that recounted the historic race to reach the South Pole between modern polar expeditions lead by Roald Amundsen, who reached the South Pole in 1911, and Robert F. Scott, who reached the South Pole in 1912. Humans have been periodically living and working in Antarctica, one of the most challenging envi-ronments on Earth, for over a hundred years. The first winter-over in Antarctica occurred during 1898–99 on board an icebound ship, the Belgica, on which Amundsen served as a second mate. A continuous presence on our furthermost southern continent has only been in place since the International Geophysical Year of 1956–57. Systematic research on isolated, confined environments can arguably be dated as beginning as recently as the late 1950s by the military, and much of the early work focused on purely physiological parameters. In their seminal collection of papers dealing with isolated environments from Antarctica to outer space, A. A. Harrison et al. pointed out that early work on psychological factors in extreme envi-ronments is often recounted as beginning with C. S. Mullin’s research on states of consciousness; E. K. E. Gunderson and colleagues’ comprehensive work on adapta-tion to Antarctica; and classic laboratory studies on group dynamics conducted by I. Altman, W. W. Haythorn, and associates.11Regardless of which analog is used to understand what helps or hinders individ-uals and groups in functioning well under extreme environmental challenges, it is necessary to characterize what we need to know for space. Although specific condi-tions of the setting vary, most extreme environments share common characteristics: 1) a high reliance on technology for life support and task performance; 2) nota-ble degrees of physical and social isolation and confinement; 3) inherent high risks
11. A. A. Harrison, Y. A. Clearwater, and C. P. McKay, From Antarctica to Outer Space: Life in Isolation and Confinement (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1991); C. S. Mullin, “Some Psychological Aspects of Isolated Antarctic Living,” American Journal of Psychiatry 111 (1960): 323; E. K. E. Gunderson, “Individual Behavior in Confined or Isolated Groups,” in Man in Isolation and Confinement, ed. J. Rasmussen (Chicago: Aldine, 1973), p. 145; E. K. E. Gunderson, “Psychological Studies in Antarctica,” in Human Adaptability to Antarctic Conditions, ed. E. K. E. Gunderson (Washington, DC: American Geophysical Union, 1974), p. 115; I. Altman, “An Ecological Approach to the Functioning of Isolated and Confined Groups,” in Man in Isolation and Confinement, ed. Rasmussen, p. 241; W. W. Haythorn, “The Miniworld of Isolation: Laboratory Studies,” in Man in Isolation and Confinement, ed. Rasmussen, p. 219.
54From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
and associated costs of failure; 4) high physical/physiological, psychological, psy-chosocial, and cognitive demands; 5) multiple critical interfaces (human-human, human-technology, and human-environment); and 6) critical requirements for team coordination, cooperation, and communication.12 This last is not insignificant. The accumulated knowledge to date is still fairly rudimentary, given the short histor-ical emergence of the “Space Age.” Drawing on research from a number of fields (e.g., social psychology, human factors, military science, management, anthropol-ogy, and sociology), researchers easily identified a number of factors that need further investigation. As early as the 1980s, psychological and sociocultural issues had been acknowledged by the National Commission on Space (1986), the National Science Board (1987), and the Space Science Board (1987) to be critical components to mis-sion success, as robust evidence from Antarctica clearly showed psychological issues to impact human behavior and performance significantly in most challenging envi-ronments, especially those characterized by isolation and confinement.13 Studies in a variety of analog environments, e.g., Antarctica, underwater capsules, submarines, caving and polar expeditions, and chamber studies, have confirmed that mission parameters have a significant influence upon the type of “best-fit” crew needed and have isolated a number of psychosocial issues that may negatively affect crewmem-bers during multinational space missions.14 These issues include 1) tension resulting
12. S. L. Bishop, “Psychological and Psychosocial Health and Well-Being at Pole Station,” in Project Boreas: A Station for the Martian Geographic North Pole, ed. Charles S. Cockell (London: British Interplanetary Society, 2006), p. 160.13. National Science Board, The Role of the National Science Foundation in Polar Regions (Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences, 1987); Space Science Board, A Strategy for Space Biology and Medical Science (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1987); National Commission on Space, Pioneering the Space Frontier (New York: Bantam Books, 1986).14. L. A. Palinkas, E. K. E. Gunderson, and R. Burr, “Social, Psychological, and Environmental Influences on Health and Well-Being of Antarctic Winter-Over Personnel,” Antarctic Journal of the United States 24 (1989): 207; L. A. Palinkas, “Sociocultural Influences on Psychosocial Adjustment in Antarctica,” Medical Anthropology 10 (1989): 235; L. A. Palinkas, “Psychosocial Effects of Adjustment in Antarctica: Lessons for Long-Duration Spaceflight,” Journal of Spacecraft 27, no. 5 (1990): 471; L. A. Palinkas, “Effects of Physical and Social Environments on the Health and Well Being of Antarctic Winter-Over Personnel,” Environment 23 (1991): 782; C. Anderson, “Polar Psychology—Coping With It All,” Nature 350, no. 6316 (28 March 1991): 290; H. Ursin, “Psychobiological Studies of Individuals in Small Isolated Groups in the Antarctic and Space Analogue,” Environment and Behavior 6 (23 November 1991): 766; L. Palinkas, E. K. E. Gunderson, and A. W. Holland, “Predictors of Behavior and Performance in Extreme Environments: The Antarctic Space Analogue Program,” Aviation, Space, and
55Psychology of Space Exploration
from external stress, 2) factors related to crew heterogeneity (e.g., differences in per-sonality, gender, and career motivation); 3) variability in the cohesion of the crew; 4) improper use of leadership role (e.g., task/instrumental versus emotional/ support-ive); 5) cultural differences; and 6) language differences. Of particular uniqueness to challenging environments is the fact that successful performance requires com-petent team interaction, including coordination, communication, and cooperation. The functioning of the operational team often determines the success or failure of the mission. Experience in spaceflight, aviation, polar, and other domains indicates that the stressors present in extreme environments, such as fatigue, physical dan-ger, interpersonal conflict, automation complexity, risk, and confusion, often chal-lenge team processes. The contribution of interpersonal and intrapersonal factors is substantial. For instance, a robust body of evidence from both civilian and mili-tary aviation identifies the majority of aircraft accidents as due to human and crew-related performance factors.15 Analyses of critical incidents in medical operating
Environmental Medicine 71 (2000): 619; S. L. Bishop and L. Primeau, “Assessment of Group Dynamics, Psychological and Physiological Parameters During Polar Winter-Over” (paper presented as part of the Human Systems Conference, Nassau Bay, TX, 20–22 June 2001); L. Palinkas, “The Psychology of Isolated and Confined Environments: Understanding Human Behavior in Antarctica,” American Psychologist 58, no. 5 (2003): 353; R. H. Gilluly, “Tektite: Unique Observations of Men Under Stress,” Science News 94 (1970): 400; J. L. Sexner, “An Experience in Submarine Psychiatry,” American Journal of Psychiatry 1 (1968): 25; G. M. Sandal, I. M. Endresen, R. Vaernes, and H. Ursin, “Personality and Coping Strategies During Submarine Missions,” Military Psychology 11 (1999): 381; S. L. Bishop, P. A. Santy, and D. Faulk, “Team Dynamics Analysis of the Huautla Cave Diving Expedition: A Case Study,” Human Performance and Extreme Environments 1, no. 3 (September 1998): 34; G. M. Sandal, R. Vaernes, P. T. Bergan, M. Warncke, and H. Ursin, “Psychological Reactions During Polar Expeditions and Isolation in Hyperbaric Chambers,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 67, no. 3 (1996): 227; S. L. Bishop, L. C. Grobler, and O. SchjØll, “Relationship of Psychological and Physiological Parameters During an Arctic Ski Expedition,” Acta Astronautica 49 (2001): 261; N. Kanas, “Psychosocial Factors Affecting Simulated and Actual Space Missions,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 56 (1985): 806.15. The Boeing Company, “Statistical Summary of Commercial Jet Aircraft Accidents: Worldwide Operations, 1959–1993,” in Boeing Airplane Safety Engineering Report B-210B (Seattle, WA: Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, 1994); M. W. Raymond and R. Moser, “Aviators at Risk,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 66, no. 1 (1995): 35; D. S. Ricketson, W. R. Brown, and K. N. Graham, “3W Approach to the Investigation, Analysis, and Prevention of Human-Error Aircraft Accidents,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 51 (1980): 1036; B. L. Weiner, B. O. Kanki, and R. L. Helmreich, Cockpit Resource Management (New York: Academic Press, 1993); D. A. Wiegmann and S. A. Shappel, “Human Factors Analysis of Postaccident Data: Applying Theoretical Taxonomies of Human
56From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
rooms indicate that 70 to 80 percent of medical mishaps are due to team and inter-personal interactions among the operating room team.16 From pilot to surgeon, fire-fighter, polar expeditioner or astronaut, we need to know if the characteristics that define adaptable and functional individuals and teams have commonalities across various environments. It is therefore critical that teamwork in these environments be examined and understood. A fundamental need to enable these investigations is developing reliable, minimally intrusive and valid methodologies for assessing individual and group responses to these stressors and identifying dysfunctional and functional coping responses. The use of extreme environments with characteristics relevant to those inherent in space travel and habitation will play a crucial role in preparing humans for egress from planet Earth.Given the disparate nature of these various environments, Peter Suedfeld has proposed five key principles that may be useful guides in assessing the relevance of various extreme environments as viable analogs for space or providing the basis for cross-comparisons:Principle 1: Researchers should think in terms of experiences within environ-ments rather than of environmental characteristics;Principle 2: Researchers should study differences and similarities between experiences, which are not the same as those between environments;Principle 3: Analogies should be based on similarities of experience, not nec-essarily of environment;Principle 4: Research should look at systematic links between personality fac-tors and experience; andPrinciple 5: Experience is continuous and integrated.17
Error,” International Journal of Aviation Psychology 7 (1997): 67; D. W. Yacovone, “Mishap Trends and Cause Factors in Naval Aviation: A Review of Naval Safety Center Data, 1986–1990,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 64 (1993): 392.16. B. Sexton, S. Marsch, R. Helmreich, D. Betzendoerfer, T. Kocher, and D. Scheidegger, “Jumpseating in the Operating Room,” Journal of Human Performance in Extreme Environments 1, no. 2 (1996): 36; J. A. Williamson, R. K. Webb, A. Sellen, W. B. Runciman, and J. H. van der Walt, “Human Failure: An Analysis of 2000 Incident Report,” Anesthesia Intensive Care 21 (1993): 678.17. P. Suedfeld, “Groups in Isolation and Confinement: Environments and Experiences,” in From Antarctica to Outer Space: Life in Isolation and Confinement, ed. A. A. Harrison, Y. A. Clearwater, and C. P. McKay (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1991), p. 135.
57Psychology of Space Exploration
CRITICAL PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES FOR SPACE
The research on teams has, to date, focused on and identified needs for further research under four broad categories. The intent here is not to recite the spectrum of findings across analogs within these areas, but to articulate how analog environ-ments can address these areas.
• Selection issues deal with the evaluation of existing ability, trainability, and adapt-ability of prospective team members. It is not merely a matter of selecting-out pathological tendencies, but, as importantly, selecting-in desirable characteris-tics. How can analog environments allow us to investigate the impact of vari-ous individual and group characteristics upon individual and group performance?• The impact of isolation and confinement has been shown to be significantly impacted by various moderator variables, e.g., the difficulty of rescue. While an emergency on the International Space Station certainly poses difficulties regarding time to rescue, one can argue that the difficulties inherent in a Mars mission or even here on Earth from the Antarctic in midwinter, where weather conditions may absolutely make rescue impossible for long periods, carry a qual-itatively different psychological impact. An emergency on a mission to Mars will preclude any chance of rescue and necessitate a high degree of autonomy for the crew in making decisions without any real-time mission support. The degree to which such factors magnify the negative effects of isolation and con-finement is critical to assess.• Group interaction and group processes are not a simple sum of the individuals that make up the group. Complex interactions can reinforce, undermine, or create new behaviors in the individuals involved. Identification of group fusion (fac-tors that encourage group cohesion) and fission (factors that contribute to group conflict) variables are elementary to creating habitats and work schedules, com-posing groups, and a myriad of other factors that will enable groups to function effectively and ensure individual and group well-being. For instance, in a study of Antarctic winter-over personnel, Palinkas found that personnel at Palmer (a small station) spent 60 percent of their waking hours alone and retreated to their bedrooms extensively for privacy. These behaviors could be considered fis-sion factors as they promote withdrawal, social isolation, and distancing from one’s teammates. On the other hand, if the use of privacy served to control the amount of contact and decreased tensions and group conflict, they would be
58From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
considered fusion factors. He also found that intermittent communication was a major source of conflict and misunderstanding between crews and external sup-port personnel, a clear source of fission influence. Examples of fusion factors for this group were effective leadership styles, which played a significant role in sta-tion and crew functioning, as well as the ability to move furniture and decorate both common and private areas, which facilitated adaptation and adjustment.18• Individual and crew performance is perhaps the clearest, most frequently studied outcome. Yet there are challenges in defining what constitutes acceptable out-comes at both the individual and group levels. They are not always the same thing, as investigations into missions that failed to meet expectations have repeatedly confirmed. It is a mistake to try to assess and maximize performance without understanding group dynamics, the effects of isolation and confinement or the environment in general on inhabitants. Given that our selection crite-ria have been little more than ruling out pathology and matching task require-ments with technical proficiency within individuals, it is of little surprise that our efforts to implement performance improvements have been only modestly suc-cessful and fraught with inconsistent results. It is necessary to take the next steps to identify which individual and group characteristics are maximally associated with adaptation and functioning in these high-challenge environments.
TERRESTRIAL ANALOGS FOR SPACE
There are surprising similarities and differences found across environments. G. M. Sandal et al. found that coping strategies during confinement on polar expe-ditions were different from those in hyperbaric chambers.19 Whereas polar teams evidenced a delay interval with a marked drop in aggression until after the first quarter, with concomitant increase in homesickness, chamber teams displayed a steady gradual increase in coping over time. A number of researchers have noted that it is not the site that seems to matter, but rather it is the differences in the mis-
18. Palinkas, “Psychosocial Effects of Adjustment in Antarctica: Lessons for Long-Duration Spaceflight”: 471.19. Sandal, Vaernes, Bergan, Warncke, and Ursin, “Psychological Reactions During Polar Expeditions and Isolation in Hyperbaric Chambers”: 227.
59Psychology of Space Exploration
sion profiles, e.g., tasks (daily achievement of a distance goal versus stationkeeping) or duration (short versus long).In fact, studies addressing Suedfeld’s Principle 4 investigating personality char-acteristics have produced supporting evidence for a focus on the experience as the defining factor rather than the environment per se. The most persistently investigated personality assessment for the last 15 years has been the NEO-PI by P. T. Costa and R. R. McCrae.20 This instrument assesses five global dimensions of personality: neu-roticism, extraversion, openness to experience, agreeableness, and conscientiousness. These dimensions have been found to be associated with the previous personality “right stuff/wrong stuff/no stuff” profiles identified by Helmreich et al. in longitudi-nal studies of American astronaut candidate performance.21 Additionally, measures of achievement motivation, interpersonal orientation, Type A, stress, and coping have been frequently evaluated. Recent studies have found evidence that agreeableness and conscientiousness seem to better predict performance at the global level, along with specific facets of extraversion.22 Conscientiousness, extraversion, and agreeable-ness have been found to be related more strongly to constructive change-oriented communication and cooperative behavior than to task performance. Cognitive ability appears to be related more strongly to task performance than to constructive change-oriented communication or cooperative behavior. Results also demonstrate contrast-ing relationships for agreeableness (positive with cooperative behavior and negative with constructive change-oriented communication).23 However, another personal-
20. P. T. Costa, Jr., and R. R. McCrae, NEO Five-Factor Inventory (Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc., 1978, 1985, 1989, 1991).21. T. J. McFadden, R. Helmreich, R. M. Rose, and L. F. Fogg, “Predicting Astronaut Effectiveness: A Multivariate Approach,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 65 (1994): 904.22. P. Suedfeld and G. D. Steel, “The Environmental Psychology of Capsule Habitats,” Annual Review of Psychology 51 (2000): 227; R. M. Rose, R. L. Helmreich, L. F. Fogg, and T. McFadden, “Psychological Predictors of Astronaut Effectiveness,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 64 (1994): 910; R. R. McCrae and J. Allik, The Five-Factor Model of Personality Across Cultures (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer, 2002).23. M. R. Barrick, G. L. Stewart, M. J. Neubert, and M. K. Mount, “Relating Member Ability and Personality to Work-Team Processes and Team Effectiveness,” Journal of Applied Psychology 83 (1998): 377; L. Ferguson, D. James, F. O’Hehir, and A. Sanders, “Pilot Study of the Roles of Personality, References, and Personal Statements in Relation to Performance over the Five Years of a Medical Degree,” British Medical Journal 326, no. 7386 (22 February 2003): 429; J. A. LePine, “Team Adaptation and Postchange Performance: Effects of
60From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
ity cluster has been identified in studies of successful polar trekking groups that is dis-tinctly different from the “right stuff” profile in which factors indicative of individuals who are loners seem to be supportive of adaptation, i.e., happier alone than depen-dent on others, highly autonomous, independent, uncomfortable about and relatively uninterested in accommodating others in a group, task-oriented and somewhat com-petitive.24 Since we do not have enough data to reliably draw inferences about these individuals, it is mere speculation at this time that perhaps the intense task focus of a polar trek, in which each individual is highly autonomous and individually self-reliant during the long travel each day, situated in an environment that precludes group interaction except for fundamental coordination of locomotion across the ter-rain, selects for individuals that are distinctly different from those who would occupy a habitat or confined environment for long durations. In other words, only individ-uals with this inward, self-focused personality would find such challenges rewarding and be successful at these tasks. Similarly, an apparently adaptive personality profile has emerged from winter-overers that is characterized by low levels of neuroticism, desire for affection, boredom, and need for order, as well as a high tolerance for lack of achievement, which would fit well in an environment where isolation and confine-ment prevented accomplishments and the participants experienced frequent short-ages and problems.25 Those that would best adapt would be those who could more quickly adjust their expectations to the immediate situation and tolerate such obsta-cles. If this hypothesis is substantiated, then we must carefully match the character-istics of the individual to the environment as well as the group in order to maximize successful adaptation and performance.Psychological research to date seems to support two general findings: 1) there do seem to be consistencies in the personality profile of functional and dysfunctional teams, and 2) characteristics of the mission may define very different personality
Team Composition in Terms of Members’ Cognitive Ability and Personality,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 1 (February 2003): 27; T. A. Judge and R. Ilies, “Relationship of Personality to Performance Motivation: A Meta-Analytic Review,” Journal of Applied Psychology 87, no. 4 (August 2002): 797.24. E. Rosnet, C. Le Scanff, and M. Sagal, “How Self-Image and Personality Affect Performance in an Isolated Environment,” Environmental Behavior 32 (2000): 18.25. L. Palinkas, E. K. E. Gunderson, and A. W. Holland, “Predictors of Behavior and Performance in Extreme Environments: The Antarctic Space Analogue Program,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 71 (2000): 619.
61Psychology of Space Exploration
profiles as best fit. Insomuch as it is possible to select for hardier and better-fit per-sonalities by filtering individuals and teams through environmental challenges, selecting analogs with highly salient and relevant characteristics that match space mission profiles (e.g., long versus short duration, stationkeeping versus expedition profiles) will be important.
The Expeditionary Analog
Expeditions, by definition, revolve around movement. Expeditionary ana-logs (e.g., oceanic, polar, desert, caving, mountaineering) include various explor-atory goals that are characterized by moving from one place to another rather than inhibiting a locale. Historical exploratory expeditions typically involved long dura-tions (i.e., months to years) characterized by significant known and unknown risks, broad goals, a high degree of situationally driven contingency decision-making, and expectations of autonomy and self-sufficiency. Modern expeditions, in contrast, are typically of short duration (i.e., two weeks to three months), utilize the advantages of technology to minimize risks (e.g., weather forecasts to take advantage of the best weather of a region and satellite communications to maintain contact), are more narrowly goal-oriented and task-focused, and involve members with special-ized roles and skills. In both expeditionary scenarios, teams were/are formed around appropriate skill sets and availability and a notable lack of any attempt to screen individuals psychologically except for medical factors. Research on team function-ing is often secondary to expedition goals, personal goals, schedules, and contingen-cies. The expedition may be intended to recreate experiences of earlier explorers, such as the Polynesian Kon-Tiki oceanic traverse; set records or discover new terri-tory, e.g., discover a route to India or explore a cave system; achieve personal chal-lenges, such as climbing mountains or skiing to the North Pole; conduct scientific research, e.g., by means of oceangoing research vessels or polar ice drilling teams; or conduct commercial exploration, such as mineral and oil exploration.26
26. Bishop, Santy, and Faulk, “Team Dynamics Analysis of the Huautla Cave Diving Expedition”; Bishop, Grobler, and SchjØll, “Relationship of Psychological and Physiological Parameters During an Arctic Ski Expedition”: 261; T. Heyerdahl, Kon-Tiki (Chicago: Rand McNally & Company, 1950); H. R. Bernard and P. Killworth, “On the Social Structure of an Ocean Going Research
62From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
Ben Finney, Professor Emeritus in Anthropology at the University of Hawai’i and noted for his work on applying anthropological perspectives to humankind’s expansion into space, has argued that from the earliest voyages to have scientific goals, “cultural” differences between scientists and seamen have led to conflict and that this inherent conflict of cultures is similarly reflected in our space program’s structural differentiation between pilots and astronaut-scientists.27 Voyages of scien-tific discovery began in the late 18th century, an age, Finney points out, that many have argued foreshadowed the space race of the 1960s.28 The first exploratory voy-age to include scientists as crew and mission goals with explicit scientific objec-tives instead of commercial goals that serendipitously collected science data was the three-year-long English expedition of the Endeavour to Tahiti, 1768–71, led by Captain James Cook. The on-board scientists were tasked to observe the transit of Venus across the face of the Sun to provide data needed to calculate the distance between Earth and the Sun. The success of the Endeavour’s expedition led to a sec-ond expedition, which sailed with a number of scientists, two astronomers, and a naturalist, an expedition that, in contrast to the first expedition, was rife with con-tentious relationships between the seamen and the scientists. Subsequent voyages with scientists on board were similarly plagued by conflicts between those pursu-ing scientific goals and those tasked with the piloting and maintenance of the ship. Historically, the English naval command eventually imposed an unofficial mora-torium on the inclusion of non-naval scientists on board and pursued a policy of assigning any scientific duties to members of the crew. Not until a hundred years after Cook, in 1872, would the Royal Navy’s Challenger, a three-masted, square-rigged, wooden vessel with a steam engine, sail around the world with six marine scientists and a crew and captain who were totally dedicated to the research.29
Vessel,” Social Science Research 2 (1973): 145; H. R. Bernard and P. Killworth, “Scientist at Sea: A Case Study in Communications at Sea,” Report BK-103-74, Code 452, Contract N00014-73-4-0417-0001, prepared for the Office of Naval Research (Springfield, VA: National Technical Information Service, 1974); M. M. Mallis and C. W. DeRoshia, “Circadian Rhythms, Sleep, and Performance in Space,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76 (2005): B94.27. B. Finney, “Scientists and Seamen,” in From Antarctica to Outer Space: Life in Isolation and Confinement, ed. Harrison, Clearwater, and McKay, p. 89.28. W. H. Goetzmann, New Lands, New Men (New York: Viking, 1986); J. Dunmore, French Explorers of the Pacific, vol. 2 (Oxford: Claredon Press, 1969).29. E. Linklater, The Voyage of the Challenger (London: John Murray, 1972).
63Psychology of Space Exploration
Such troubles were not limited to the English. The French followed a sim-ilar pattern, beginning in 1766 and continuing through 1800, when scientists sailed with numerous expeditions that were summarily characterized by conflict and contention between the crews and scientists.30 Finney further notes that such complaints are found in journals of early Russian scientists, as well as American sci-entists on the four-year-long United States Exploring Expedition that sailed from Norfolk in 1838 with a contingent of 12 scientists.31Modern development of specialized ships complete with laboratories and equipment dedicated to oceanographic research has been primarily organized and maintained by universities and oceanographic institutes. Yet even aboard these dedicated floating research vessels, conflict between the ship’s crew and the scien-tists whom they serve has not been eliminated. A dissertation study conducted by a resident at the Scripps Institute of Oceanography during 1973 concluded that ten-sion between the two groups was inevitable because they formed two essentially separate and distinct subcultures with different values and goals, as well as different educational backgrounds and class memberships.32Finney argues that the same subcultures have become evident in the space pro-gram with the development of the role of payload specialists, who are considered visiting scientists rather than part of the elite astronaut corps. Tensions between payload specialists in pursuit of the scientific goals and the crew in pursuit of mis-sion completion have routinely been in evidence. Finney eloquently states:
[I]f space research were to be made as routine to the extent that ocean research now is, subcultural differences, and hence ten-sions, between scientist and those pilots, stationkeepers, and oth-ers whose job it will be to enable researchers to carry out their tasks in space may become critical considerations. If so, space analogues of the mechanisms that have evolved to accommodate differences
30. J. Dunmore, French Explorers of the Pacific, vol. 1 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1965).31. A. von Chamisso, Reise um die Welt mit der Romanoffischen Entdeckungs Expedition in den Jahren 1815–1818 (Berlin: Weidmann, 1856); W. Stanton, The Great United States Exploring Expedition of 1838–1842 (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1975).32. Bernard and Killworth, “On the Social Structure of an Ocean Going Research Vessel”: 145; Bernard and Killworth, “Scientist at Sea: A Case Study in Communications at Sea.”
64From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
between scientists and seamen aboard oceanographic ships may have to be developed.33
The number and variety of expeditions examined for relevance to space is ever increasing as both modern expeditions and analyses of historical expeditions are scrutinized. An example of how examination of the records from past expedi-tions contributes to the current state of knowledge and provides the impetus for future studies in space can be seen in a metastudy by M. Dudley-Rowley et al. that examines written records from a sample of space missions and polar expeditions for similarities and differences in conflicts and perceptions of subjective duration of the mission. Ten missions were compared across a number of dimensions.34 The metastudy included three space missions that represented both long- and short-duration mission profiles: Apollo 11 (1969) and Apollo 13 (1970), ranging from six to eight days apiece, and Salyut 7 (1982), which lasted over two hundred days. Four Antarctic expeditions were included: the western party field trip of the Terra Nova Expedition (1913, 48 days), an International Geophysical Year (IGY) tra-verse (1957–58, 88 days), the Frozen Sea expedition (1982–84, 480 days), and the International Trans-Antarctic expedition (1990, 224 days). Finally, three early Arctic expeditions were also included: the Lady Franklin Bay (1881–84, 1,080 days), Wrangel Island (1921–23, 720 days), and Dominion Explorers’ (1929, 72 days). Seven factors emerged that seemed to coincide with the subjectivization of time and the differentiation of situational reality for the crews from baseline:
1. increasing distance from rescue in case of emergency (lessening chances of “returnability”);2. increasing proximity to unknown or little-understood phenomena (which could include increasing distance from Earth);3. increasing reliance on a limited, contained environment (where a breach of environmental seals means death or where a fire inside could rapidly replace atmosphere with toxins);
33. Finney, “Scientists and Seamen,” p. 100.34. M. Dudley-Rowley, S. Whitney, S. Bishop, B. Caldwell, and P. D. Nolan, “Crew Size, Composition and Time: Implications for Habitat and Workplace Design in Extreme Environments” (paper presented at the SAE 30th International Conference on Environmental Systems, 10–13 July 2000).
65Psychology of Space Exploration
4. increasing difficulties in communicating with Ground or Base;5. increasing reliance on a group of companions who come to compose a micro-society as time, confinement, and distance leave the larger society behind, in a situation where innovative norms may emerge in response to the new socio-physical environment;6. increasing autonomy from Ground’s or Base’s technological aid or advice; and7. diminishing available resources needed for life and the enjoyment of life.The missions and expeditions were ranked by prevalence of the seven factors that might correspond with the differentiation in the subjectivization of the pas-sage of time and in the situational reality for the crews from baseline. From high-est to lowest in compromising factors, the rankings fell in the following order: Lady Franklin Bay (7); Wrangel Island, Apollo 13 (6); Salyut 7 (5); Terra Nova, Apollo 11 (4); Dominion Explorers’ (3); Frozen Sea (2); IGY (1); International Trans-Antarctic Expedition (0). The Lady Franklin Bay Expedition suffered 18 deaths of its complement of 25, and the rest were starving when found. The Wrangel Island expedition suffered four deaths out of its crew of five. Apollo 13 was a catastrophe that was remarkable in its recovery of the crew intact. The Salyut 7 mission, the Terra Nova western field party, and the Apollo 11 mission all had high degrees of risk. The later polar expeditions rank below these missions.Both the space missions and the earliest polar expeditions are above or hover just below the median (3.5). Although the authors correctly note that the sam-ple is too small to draw conclusions, the presence of similar factors in space and early polar exploration that contributed to perceptions of mission/expedition dura-tion or of how their situational reality deviates from baseline is important to note. These results suggest that as control over their environment decreases, team mem-bers’ subjective experiences of time and the situation increasingly differ from their baselines. The strong parallel between early expeditions and modern space missions lends support for historical analogs as viable substitutes for space.
Chamber Studies
Early evaluations for astronaut selection drew upon a history of sensory depri-vation research initially begun by the military throughout the 1950s and 1960s to address performance concerns about two-person crews confined to armored vehicles
66From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
for long durations and continued most notably through the series of studies con-ducted by J. P. Zubek.35 Initially, it was believed that space would represent a sig-nificant loss of normal sensory stimulation due to isolation from people, reduction in physical stimulation, and restricted mobility. Thus, sensory deprivation cham-bers were argued to be good analogs for astronauts.36 Selection procedures, there-fore, included stints in dark, small, enclosed spaces for several hours to observe how potential astronauts handled the confinement and loss of perceptual cues. As Dr. Bernard Harris, the first African American to walk in space, recounts, “They put me in this little box where I couldn’t move or see or hear anything. As I recall, I fell asleep after a while until the test ended.”37The first systematic attempts to investigate psychological adaptation factors to isolation and confinement in simulated operational environments were conducted in the 1960s and early 1970s by putting volunteers in closed rooms for several days, subjecting them to sleep deprivation and/or various levels of task demands by hav-ing them complete repetitive research tasks to evaluate various aspects of perfor-mance decrements.38 Chamber research, as it was to become known, encompassed a variety of artificial, constructed environments whose raison d’être was control over all factors not specifically under study. Later, specially constructed confine-ment laboratories such as the facility at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine or simulators at Marshall Space Fight Center in Huntsville, Alabama; the McDonnell Douglas Corporation in Huntington Beach, California; or Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, California, housed small groups of three to six individuals in programmed environments for weeks to months of continuous res-idence to address a variety of space-science-related human biobehavioral issues related to group dynamics (e.g., cohesion, motivation, effects of joining and leav-
35. J. P. Zubek, Sensory Deprivation: Fifteen Years of Research (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1969); R. Honingfeld, “Group Behavior in Confinement: Review and Annotated Bibliography,” Report AD0640161, prepared for the Human Engineering Lab (MD: Aberdeen Proving Ground, October 1965), p. 117.36. B. E. Flaherty, ed., Psychophysiological Aspects of Space Flight (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961).37. B. Harris, personal communication, thesis committee member (1995–96).38. Haythorn and Altman, “Personality Factors in Isolated Environments”; Altman, “An Ecological Approach to the Functioning of Isolated and Confined Groups,” p. 241.
67Psychology of Space Exploration
ing established groups), performance and work productivity, communication pat-terns, team cooperation, and social habitability factors.The epitome example of chamber research may be the series of four hyperbaric-chamber studies, sponsored by the European Space Agency and designed to investi-gate psychosocial functioning, in which groups were confined for periods lasting from 28 to 240 days.39 Full mission protocols specifying all medical, technical, and opera-tional parameters approximating expected living conditions of astronauts on a space station were used. The studies were intended to evaluate the efficacy of various psy-chosocial monitoring and assessment techniques for implementation on real space missions, as well as to investigate persistent occurrences of communication and inter-action breakdowns between on-orbit teams and Mission Control anecdotally reported from space.40 A number of opportunities and advances came from these studies, e.g., evaluating the efficacy of communication training for space teams or the opportunity to examine factors involved in an unplanned meltdown between crews precipitated by differences in cultural attitudes and norms about genders, authority, and control.41 However, skepticism regarding the verisimilitude of studies in which discontented members can simply quit has continued to raise real concerns as to how generalizable the findings from chamber studies are to space missions.
The Middle Ground: Capsule Habitats in Extreme Unusual Environments
Occupying the middle ground between traditional expeditionary missions with moving trajectories and the artificiality of laboratory spaces designated as space
39. G. M. Sandal, R. Vaernes, and H. Ursin, “Interpersonal Relations During Simulated Space Missions,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 66 (1995): 617; G. M. Sandal, “Culture and Crew Tension During an International Space Station Simulation: Results From SFINCSS’99,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 75 (2004): 44.40. Kanas, Salnitskiy, Grund, et al., “Social and Cultural Issues During Shuttle/Mir Space Missions”: 647; Sandal, Vaernes, and Ursin, “Interpersonal Relations During Simulated Space Missions”: 617; Gushin, Kolintchenko, Efimov, and Davies, “Psychological Evaluation and Support During EXEMSI”: 283.41. Sandal, “Culture and Crew Tension During an International Space Station Simulation”: 44; D. Manzey, ed., Space Psychology: Textbook for Basic Psychological Training of Astronauts (Cologne, Germany: AM-BMT-DLR-98-009, ESA/EAC, 1998).
68From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
station habitats are capsule habitats, sharing the controlled, defined enclosure of the laboratory situated within an extreme unusual environment (EUE).42 Characterized by a controlled, highly technological habitat that provides protection and life sup-port from an environment that is harsh, dangerous, and life-threatening, capsule habitats occupy a wide range of environments. Some are true operational bases with missions in which biobehavioral research is only secondary. Others run the gamut from fundamental “tuna can” habitats with spartan support capabilities situated in locations of varying access to a full-fidelity Antarctic base constructed solely for the purposes of biobehavioral space analog research.
Submersible Habitats
Due to their high military relevance, the best-studied of capsule habitats are sub-marines. As an analog for space, submarines share a number of common characteristics: pressurization concerns (hyperpressurization for submarines and loss of pressurization for space), catastrophic outcomes for loss of power (e.g., the inability to return to the sur-face for submarines and degraded orbits for space), dependence on atmosphere revital-ization and decontamination, radiation effects, and severe space restrictions. Prenuclear submarine environments were limited in the duration of submersions (72 hours), crew size (9 officers and 64 enlisted men), and deployment periods without restocking of fuel and supplies. Structurally, these short-duration mission parameters mimicked those of the early years of space, albeit with vastly larger crews. With the launch of the nuclear-powered Nautilus in 1954, the verisimilitude of the submersible environment as an analog for long-duration space missions was vastly improved. With the nuclear subma-rine, mission durations were extended to 60 to 90 days, crews were increased to 16 offi-cers and 148 enlisted men, and resupply could be delayed for months.43 Generalizing from submarine research to space regarding psychological and human factors related to adjustment and well-being, researchers have identified several salient issues:
42. Suedfeld and Steel, “The Environmental Psychology of Capsule Habitats”: 227.43. B. B. Weybrew, “Three Decades of Nuclear Submarine Research: Implications for Space and Antarctic Research,” in From Antarctica to Outer Space: Life in Isolation and Confinement, ed. Harrison, Clearwater, and McKay, p. 103.
69Psychology of Space Exploration
• atmospheric revitalization and contamination control;• development and validation of procedures for the medical and psychological screening of recruits;• identification of techniques for initiating and sustaining individual motivation and group morale; and• identification of stressors, assessment of the severity of patterns of stress reac-tivity, and development of effective stress coping strategies.44An extension of the submersible operational environment of a military subma-rine is the NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations program (NEEMO) being conducted in the Aquarius underwater habitat situated off Key Largo, Florida—the only undersea research laboratory in the world. Owned by the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and operated by the National Undersea Research Center (NURC) of the University of North Carolina at Wilmington on behalf of NOAA, Aquarius is the submerged analog to NOAA oceanic research vessels. First deployed in 1988 in the U.S. Virgin Islands and relocated to Key Largo in 1992, the underwater facility has hosted more than 80 missions and 13 crews of astronauts and space researchers since 2001. Aquarius provides a capsule habitat uniquely situated within an environment that replicates many of the closed-loop constraints of the vacuum of space, a hostile, alien envi-ronment that requires total dependency on life support; poses significant restric-tions to escape or access to immediate help; and is defined by limited, confined habitable space and physical isolation. The complexity of NEEMO missions further parallels space missions in their mission architecture, with similar requirements for extensive planning, training, control, and monitoring via an external mission con-trol entity. However, it has only been the most recent NEEMO missions in which stress, fatigue, and cognitive fitness, as well as individual and intrapersonal mood and interaction, have been the focus of study.
44. B. B. Weybrew, R. L. Helmreich, and N. Howard, “Psychobiological and Psychosocial Issues in Space Station Planning and Design: Inferences from Analogous Environments and Conditions” (unpublished report prepared for NASA, 1986).
70From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
Polar Stations
First and foremost, Antarctica springs to mind when polar space analogs are raised. While there are other polar bases in the Arctic and subarctic, the bulk of sus-tained psychological research has been conducted in Antarctica.45 G. M. Sandal et al. conducted a recent, extensive review of the literature on psychosocial adaptation by polar work groups, expedition teams, Antarctic bases, simulation, and space crews.46 There are 47 stations throughout the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic regions, operated by 20 different nations, with populations running from 14 to 1,100 men and women in the summer to 10 to 250 during the winter months. The base populations vary from mixed-gendered crews to male-only crews, from intact families (Chile) to unattached singletons, for assignments that last from a few months to three years.In 1958, after the IGY (1956–57) produced the first permanent bases in Antarctica, C. S. Mullin, H. Connery, and F. Wouters conducted the first system-atic psychological study of 85 men wintering over in Antarctica.47 Their study was the first of many to identify the Antarctic fugue state later dubbed the “big-eye,” characterized by pronounced absentmindedness, wandering of attention, and dete-rioration in situational awareness that surfaced after only a few months in iso-lation. The majority of subsequent studies up through the 1980s focused on the physiological changes evidenced in winter-over adaptation. Those that did address psychosocial factors tended to focus on the negative or pathological problems of psychological adjustment to Antarctic isolation and confinement, with persis-tent findings of depression, hostility, sleep disturbance, and impaired cognition, which quickly came to be classified as the “winter-over syndrome.”48 Sprinkled
45. Harrison, Clearwater, and McKay, From Antarctica to Outer Space: Life in Isolation and Confinement.46. G. M. Sandal, G. R. Leon, and L. Palinkas, “Human Challenges in Polar and Space Environments,” Review Environmental Science and Biotechnology 5, nos. 2–3 (2006), doi:10.1007/s11157-006-9000-8.47. C. S. Mullin, H. Connery, and F. Wouters, “A Psychological-Psychiatric Study of an IGY Station in Antarctica” (report prepared for the U.S. Navy, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, Neuropsychiatric Division, 1958).48. E. K. E. Gunderson, “Individual Behavior in Confined or Isolated Groups,” in Man in Isolation and Confinement, ed. Rasmussen, p. 145; Gunderson, “Psychological Studies in Antarctica,” p. 115; R. Strange and W. Klein, “Emotional and Social Adjustment of Recent U.S. Winter-Over Parties in Isolated Antarctic Station,” in Polar Human Biology: The Proceedings of the
71Psychology of Space Exploration
among Antarctic research have been findings that also report positive, or saluto-genic, aspects of the winter-over experience in which winter-overers have reported enhanced self-growth, positive impacts to careers, and opportunities for reflection and self-improvement.49One of Antarctica’s most prolific researchers, Dr. Larry Palinkas has analyzed 1,100 Americans who wintered over between 1963 and 2003 over four decades of research in Antarctica and proposed four distinct characteristics to psychosocial adaptation to isolation, confinement, and the extreme environment:
1. Adaptation follows a seasonal or cyclical pattern that seems to be associated with the altered diurnal cycle and psychological segmentation of the mission.2. Adaptation is highly situational. Because of unique features of the station’s social and physical environment and the lack of resources typically used to cope, baseline psychological measures are not as good predictors of depressed mood and performance evaluations as are concurrent psychological measures.3. Adaptation is social. The structure of the group directly impacts individual well-being. Crews with clique structures report significantly more depression, anxiety, anger, fatigue, and confusion than crews with core-periphery structures.4. Adaptation can also be “salutogenic,” i.e., having a positive effect for individ-uals seeking challenging experiences in extreme environments.50Palinkas found that a depressed mood was inversely associated with the severity of station physical environments—that is, the better the environment, the worse the depression—and that the winter-over experience was associated with reduced
SCAR/IUPS/IUBS Symposium on Human Biology and Medicine in the Antarctic, ed. O. G. Edholm and E. K. E. Gunderson (Chicago: Year Book Medical Publications, 1974), p. 410.49. Mullin, “Some Psychological Aspects of Isolated Antarctic Living”: 323; A. J. W. Taylor and J. T. Shurley, “Some Antarctic Troglodytes,” International Review of Applied Psychology 20 (1971): 143–148; O. Wilson, “Human Adaptation to Life in Antarctica,” in Biogeography and Ecology in Antarctica, ed. J. Van Meigheim, P. van Oue, and J. Schell, Monographiae Biologicae, vol. 15 (The Hague: W. Junk, 1965), p. 690; L. A. Palinkas, “Health and Performance of Antarctic Winter-Over Personnel: A Follow-Up Study,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 57 (1986): 954–959; D. Oliver, “Psychological Effects of Isolation and Confinement of a Winter-Over Group at McMurdo Station, Antarctica,” in From Antarctica to Outer Space: Life in Isolation and Confinement, ed. Harrison, Clearwater, and McKay, p. 217; P. Suedfeld, “Invulnerability, Coping, Salutogenesis, Integration: Four Phases of Space Psychology,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 76 (2005): B61.50. Palinkas, “On the ICE.”
72From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
subsequent rates of hospital admissions.51 He and others have speculated that the experience of adapting to the isolation and confinement, in general, improved an individual’s self-efficacy and self-reliance and engendered coping skills that they used in other areas of life to buffer subsequent stress and resultant illnesses.52
Concordia
In 1992, France initiated plans for a new Antarctic station on the Antarctic Plateau and was later joined by Italy. In 1996, the first French-Italian team estab-lished a summer camp at Dome C to provide logistical support for the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA) and begin the construction of the permanent research station. Concordia Station became operational in 2005; the first winter-over took place in February 2005 with a staff of 13. The station consists of three buildings, which are interlinked by enclosed walkways. Two large, cylin-drical three-story buildings provide the station’s main living and working quarters, while the third building houses technical equipment, like the electrical power plant and boiler room. The station can accommodate 16 people during the winter and 32 people during the summer season. The typical winter population consists of four technicians for the station maintenance, nine scientists or technicians for the sci-ence projects, a chief, a cook, and a medical doctor.Dome C is one of the coldest places on Earth, with temperatures hardly rising above –25°C in summer and falling below –80°C in winter. Situated on top of the Antarctic plateau, the world’s largest desert, it is extraordinarily dry and supports no animals or plants. The first summer campaign lasted 96 days, from 5 November 2005 until 8 February 2006, with 95 persons participating. The 2006 season included seven crewmembers with two medical experiments and the first two psychological exper-iments sponsored by the European Space Agency for which the crew acted as sub-jects during their stay. The two experiments investigated psychological adaptation to the environment and the process of developing group identity, issues that will also be important factors for humans traveling to Mars. For this research, the crew completed
51. Ibid.52. Ibid.; Suedfeld, “Invulnerability, Coping, Salutogenesis, Integration”: B61.
73Psychology of Space Exploration
questionnaires at regular intervals throughout their stay. The ESA’s Mistacoba experi-ment to profile how microbes spread and evolve in the station—an isolated and con-fined environment—over time started in the 2005 season, when the first crew started living at the station, and has also continued with subsequent crews. Starting from a newly built clean environment, those conducting the study took samples from fixed locations in the base as well as from crewmembers themselves.53
Haughton-Mars Project
One of the first of dedicated research hybrid facilities was the Haughton-Mars Project (HMP), initiated in 1996 when the National Research Council of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences and NASA Ames Research Center sponsored a post-doctoral proposal to study the Haughton Crater on Devon Island in the Canadian Arctic as a potential analog for Mars. The program has expanded from a four-member team in 1997 to a permanent habitat that hosts eight-week arctic summer field seasons with 50 to 90 participants, multiple teams, and research projects that run from instru-ment testing and development to biomedical and psychological evaluation. HMP routinely supports participation by NASA; the Canadian Space Agency (CSA); the Russian Institute for Space Research (IKI); various research institutions and univer-sities in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom; and the U.S. Marine Corps. It has been the subject of various documentaries made by such groups as the National Geographic Society and Discovery Channel Canada.54
Flashline Mars Arctic Research Station
In 2000, a second dedicated research facility was deployed on Devon Island, jointly sponsored by the Haughton-Mars Project and the Mars Society: the Flashline
53. European Space Agency, “The Concordia Station,” http://www.concordiastation.org/ (accessed 25 May 2010); ESA Research News, http://www.esa.int/esaHS/SEMBZA8A9HE_research_0.html#subhead1 (accessed 18 June 2007).54. The Mars Institute, “NASA Haughton-Mars Project History,” available at http://www.marsonearth.org/about/history.html (accessed 14 June 2007).
74From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
Mars Arctic Research Station (FMARS). Running concurrently with HMP, the FMARS facility was the first of four proposed analog research facilities to be built by the Mars Society, supporting smaller six-person crews for typically two- to eight-week seasons. In summer 2007, the first four-month-long FMARS mission was suc-cessfully completed with a crew of seven and a full complement of research studies covering technology, human factors, medicine, psychology, and communications.
Mars Desert Research Station
The second Mars Society station, the Mars Desert Research Station (MDRS), came online in December 2001 and is situated in the Utah desert in the American Southwest. Because of its ease of access, the American station is considered well suited as a test bed for equipment that will later be sent to more remote and unfor-giving locations. For the same reason, the American station has been the focus of short-duration isolation and confinement studies since its inception. A wide range of psychological studies investigating crew factors in short-duration missions has been in place since 2002. However, beyond preliminary descriptive results pre-sented at conferences, the small sample size of crews has necessitated waiting until enough teams have rotated through the facility to allow meta-analyses.55 Several international teams have also used the MDRS for studies investigating comparisons between homogeneous-gendered teams, comparisons between mission teams and backup crews, and international cultural factors, among others.56
55. S. L. Bishop, S. Dawson, N. Rawat, K. Reynolds, and R. Eggins, “Expedition One: Assessing Group Dynamics in a Desert Mars Simulation” (paper presented as part of the 55th International Astronautics Conference, Vancouver, BC, 4–7 October 2004); S. L. Bishop, S. Dawson, N. Rawat, K. Reynolds, R. Eggins, and K. Bunzelek, “Assessing Teams in Mars Simulation Habitats: Lessons Learned from 2002–2004,” in Mars Analog Research, ed. J. D. Clarke, American Astronautical Society Science and Technology Series, vol. 111 (San Diego: Univelt, 2006), p. 177.56. S. L. Bishop, A. Sundaresan, A. Pacros, R. Patricio, and R. Annes, “A Comparison of Homogeneous Male and Female Teams in a Mars Simulation” (paper presented as part of the 56th International Astronautical Congress, Fukuoka, Japan, October 2005); S. L. Bishop, “Assessing Group Dynamics in a Mars Simulation: AustroMars Crew 48” (paper presented as part of the Mars2030: Interdisciplinary Workshop on Mars Analogue Research and AustroMars Science Workshop, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 24–26 September 2006).
75Psychology of Space Exploration
The Mars Society plans additional facilities in Iceland and Australia that will capitalize on geological features that present opportunities to practice Mars exobi-ology field work. The Mars Society’s Mars Analog Research Station Project envi-sions three prime goals to be served by these habitats:57
• The stations will serve as effective test beds for field operations studies in prep-aration for human missions to Mars. They will facilitate the development and testing of key habitat design features, field exploration strategies, tools, tech-nologies, and crew selection protocols that will enable and help optimize the productive exploration of Mars by humans. In order to achieve this goal, each station must be a realistic and adaptable habitat.• The stations will serve as useful field research facilities at selected Mars analog sites on Earth and will help further understanding of the geology, biology, and environmental conditions on Earth and on Mars. In order to achieve this objec-tive, each station must provide safe shelter and be an effective field laboratory.• The stations will generate public support for sending humans to Mars. They will inform and inspire audiences around the world. As the Mars Society’s flag-ship program, the Mars Analog Research project will serve as the foundation of a series of bold steps that will pave the way to the eventual human explora-tion of Mars.
CONCLUSION
The use of analogs for space is an emergent field whose very short track record examining team dynamics and psychosocial factors impacting individual and group functioning vigorously supports the real value of these environments and general-izability to space environments. Unlike laboratory studies, where the threat of real danger is usually absent, teams operating within real extreme environments have unknown situational and environmental challenges to face. Even in circumstances in which death or injury occurs, there will always be questions regarding the ability to avoid negative outcomes. While postmission analyses of behavior and performance
57. The Mars Society, “Mars Desert Research Station Project Goals,” available at http://www.marssociety.org/MDRS/mdrs01b.asp (accessed 14 June 2007).
76From Earth Analogs to Space: Getting There from Here
add insight into contributing factors, it is seriously doubtful whether we will ever be able to accurately predict the entire range and complexity of interaction between the human-environment factors and the human-human factors. Risk is inherent in human exploration. Even so, the value of analog experiences cannot be underesti-mated, regardless of whether they help us grapple with defining our levels of adequate preparation in the face of ideally predefined levels of “acceptable risk” or even “accept-able losses” (a concept familiar to those who perform military risk assessments).One key methodological and validity issue is the added value of utilizing con-sistent measures across various analogs, allowing more accurate comparisons of indi-viduals and teams across environments, including space. The necessity to validate multicultural questionnaires and methodologies that are relevant, reliable, and valid for international teams is of paramount importance as our reliance on these multi-national teams will only increase in the future. To that extent, the various research endeavors in analog environments have contributed significantly to validating such assessment instruments in a variety of teams.Findings from analogs have clearly identified three major intervention points to affect group functioning outcomes:
• Selection: the development of reliable and valid methods of choosing the best fit at both the individual and the group levels.• Training: improving the fitness of the group by prepping skills needed for interpersonal group dynamics as well as high-functioning self-monitoring and appropriate adaptation.• Support: taking the form of prevention first, then early, proactive intervention second. To be successful, research to date strongly suggests that the support must include the group, the family, and all external participants (e.g., Mission Control) as partners.
A large portion of the current research represents opportunities to examine team dynamics and factors that impact team function in real-world groups that have been brought together for particular purposes that have little to do with research, e.g., geo-logical field teams. Similarly, examinations of historical sources of past expeditions will continue to inform and provide additional insight into factors that have contributed to the success or failure of previous efforts. However, we need larger, more systematic studies in which the composition of the team is one of the driving factors under inves-tigation instead of simply an extraneous variable. Our greatest hope lies with the new research facilities now available and coming online dedicated to such research.
77Chapter 4
Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
Julie A. Robinson
Office of the ISS Program Scientist National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Johnson Space Center (JSC)
Kelley J. Slack
Behavioral Health and Performance Research Wyle Laboratories
Valerie A. Olson
Department of Anthropology Rice University
Michael H. Trenchard
Image Science and Analysis Laboratory Engineering and Science Contract Group (ESCG) NASA JSC
Kimberly J. Willis
Image Science and Analysis Laboratory ESCG NASA JSC
Pamela J. Baskin
Behavioral Health and Performance Research Wyle Laboratories
Jennifer E. Boyd
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco; and San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center
79Psychology of Space Exploration
ABSTRACT
To provide for crewmember well-being on future exploration missions, under-standing coping strategies that International Space Station (ISS) crewmembers adopt to mitigate the inherent stress of long-duration confinement is important. A recent retrospective survey of flown astronauts found that the most commonly reported psychologically enriching aspects of spaceflight had to do with their per-ceptions of Earth. ISS crewmembers photograph Earth both volitionally and in response to requests from Crew Earth Observations (CEO) scientists. Automatically recorded data from the camera can be used to test hypotheses about factors corre-lated with self-initiated crewmember photography. The present study used these objective in-flight data to investigate the nature of voluntary photographic activity. We examined the distribution of photographs with respect to time, crew, and sub-ject matter. We determined whether the frequency fluctuated in conjunction with major mission events such as vehicle dockings and extravehicular activities (EVAs, or spacewalks), relative to the norm for the relevant crew. We also examined the influence of geographic and temporal patterns on frequency of Earth photography activities. We tested the hypotheses that there would be peak photography inten-sity over locations of personal interest, as well as on weekends.Of nearly 200,000 photographs taken on eight ISS expeditions, 84.5 percent were crew-initiated. Once a crewmember went to the window for a CEO request, he or she was more likely to take photographs for his or her own interest. Fewer self-initiated images were taken during and immediately preceding major station events. Crewmembers were more likely to take self-initiated images during peri-ods when they had more free time. Analysis indicated some phasing in patterns of photography during the course of a mission, although it did not suggest that psy-chological functioning was lower during the third quarter of confinement (i.e., no third-quarter effect was found). Earth photography is a self-initiated positive activ-ity of possible importance for salutogenesis (increase in well-being) of astronauts on long-duration missions. Scientific requests for photography through CEO play an important role in facilitating crew-initiated photography. Consideration should be given to developing substitute activities for crewmembers in future exploration missions where there will not be the opportunity to look at Earth, such as on long-duration transits to Mars.
80Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
BACKGROUND
Earth Observation Throughout Human Spaceflight
John Glenn, the first U.S. astronaut in orbit, talked NASA into letting him carry a camera on Friendship 7 on 20 February 1962.1 On reaching orbit, Glenn told capsule communicator Alan Shepard over the radio, “Oh, that view is tremen-dous.” Glenn proceeded to describe each of the three sunrises and sunsets he saw during the flight, and he continues to recount that experience in interviews today.2 A number of the astronauts who have followed have verbally recounted emo-tional experiences related to seeing and photographing Earth, and several astro-nauts have documented in written form their responses to views of Earth linked to their photography activities while in space. Space Shuttle astronaut Kathryn D. Sullivan wrote in an article documented with her Earth photography, “It’s hard to explain how amazing and magical this experience is. First of all, there’s the astound-ing beauty and diversity of the planet itself, scrolling across your view at what appears to be a smooth, stately pace . . . I’m happy to report that no amount of prior study or training can fully prepare anybody for the awe and wonder this inspires.”3 Observations of familiar places on Earth can also have strong emotional connec-tions. NASA-Mir astronaut Jerry Linenger recorded photographing his hometown in Michigan in his crew notebook, “Great View—Michigan + Great Lakes cloud-free—ready to go home, now!”4From Apollo to the current ISS, scientists have assisted astronauts with crew-initiated and science-specific photography of Earth. All the imagery is archived in a searchable online database maintained by the descendant of the previous pro-
1. Jay Apt, Justin Wilkinson, and Michael Helfert, Orbit: NASA Astronauts Photograph the Earth (Washington, DC: National Geographic Society), pp. 11–13.2. Bryan Ethier, “John Glenn: First American to Orbit the Earth,” American History, October 1997, available at http://www.historynet.com/magazines/american_history/3030096.html (accessed 7 June 2010).3. Kathryn D. Sullivan, “An Astronaut’s View of Earth,” Update (newsletter of the National Geographic Society’s Geography Education Program) (fall 1991): 1, 12–14, available at http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov/newsletter/uft/uft1.htm (accessed 7 June 2010).4. Kamlesh P. Lulla, Lev V. Dessinov, Cynthia A. Evans, Patricia W. Dickerson, and Julie A. Robinson, Dynamic Earth Environments: Remote Sensing Observations from Shuttle–Mir Missions (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000).
81Psychology of Space Exploration
grams on the International Space Station, CEO, which provided statistics summarized here. Over 2,500 photographs of Earth were taken by Mercury and Gemini astronauts. Apollo astronauts photographed both Earth and Moon views, with over 11,000 photographs taken, and have been credited with initiating the interest in Earth observations from space.5 Handheld photography of Earth by astronauts on Skylab accompanied the extensive imagery obtained by an automated multispectral camera system.6 Over the three Skylab missions, crewmembers took around 2,400 images of Earth, and the automated camera systems an additional 38,000 photographs with specialized films.
Building from this experience and the growing interest in Earth observations from space, a program called the Space Shuttle Earth Observations Project (SSEOP) was established in 1982 to support the acquisition and scientific use of Earth photography from Space Shuttle flights. Located at the center of astronaut training, Johnson Space Center, SSEOP scientists were assigned to each Shuttle crew. Astronauts were trained in geology, geography, meteorology, oceanography, and environmental change for a total of approximately 12 instructional hours prior to flight. Also before flight, about 20 to 30 sites were chosen for the crew to photograph while on orbit. The mission-specific sites were chosen from a list of previously identified environmentally dynamic terrestrial areas visible from the Space Shuttle. Each crew was given a preflight manual consisting of their unique sites that included photographs and scientific information. The decision on when to take photographs was at the astronauts’ discretion. A list of targets was sent to the Shuttle crew on a daily basis during the flight. The main camera used for Earth observation was the 70-millimeter Hasselblad with the 50-, 100-, 110-, and 250-millimeter lenses commonly used, and both color and infrared film was made available per crew preference.7 After each flight, the Earth-viewing film was cataloged and entered into a database. Paper catalogs were also mailed to a subscriber list of interested scientists
5. Paul D. Lowman, Jr., “Landsat and Apollo: The Forgotten Legacy,” Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 65 (1999): 1143–1147.6. NASA, Skylab Earth Resources Data Catalog, JSC-09016 (Houston, TX: Johnson Space Center, 1974); V. R. Wilmarth, J. L. Kaltenbach, and W. B. Lenoir, eds., Skylab Explores the Earth (Washington, DC: NASA SP-380, 1977), pp. 1–35.7. Julie A. Robinson, David L. Amsbury, Donn A. Liddle, and Cynthia A. Evans, “Astronaut-Acquired Orbital Photographs as Digital Data for Remote Sensing: Spatial Resolution,” International Journal of Remote Sensing 23 (2002): 4403–4438.
82Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—
Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
and educational and government users. To date, Shuttle crewmembers have cap-tured over 287,000 images of Earth.From March 1996 through June 1998, the scientists of SSEOP supported Earth photography by crewmembers spending longer durations in space as part of the NASA-Mir program. U.S. investigators collaborated with the Institute of Geography, Russian Academy of Sciences, in developing Earth observation objec-tives for astronauts on board Mir.8 The documentation of dynamic environmental changes on Earth’s surface was a primary objective for both SSEOP and the Russian Institute of Geography. Another objective was to develop scientific approaches and procedures that could later be applied to the same kinds of dynamic observations from the ISS. With the advent of Shuttle-Mir and the ISS, the focus of SSEOP changed from short-term observation to long-term observation.The cameras used on Shuttle-Mir were the same as on the Shuttle, with the 70-millimeter Hasselblad (film) as the main camera, but the Nikon F3 35-millimeter camera was also available. A joint list of sites was chosen by U.S. and Russian sci-entists for Shuttle-Mir. Earth observation target sites were sent to the Shuttle-Mir crews weekly. Training was modified from the typical Shuttle briefings to enable the Shuttle-Mir crews to document unanticipated dynamic events as well as targets of opportunity that would be encountered more often on long-term missions. Another benefit of long-term Earth observing missions was the ability to document seasonal change and long-term climatic effects. Approximately 22,500 photographs were taken during the seven Shuttle-Mir missions.Crew Earth Observations began as a formal ISS research activity (“payload”) on the first mission, Expedition 1, in October 2000. Training for ISS crews evolved from experiences gained in the Shuttle and Shuttle-Mir programs. Rather than discipline-specific training, ISS crews were trained on science topics such as coral reefs, global urban systems, deltas, and glaciers. The emphasis was more on observ-ing Earth as a system than on documenting independent events. An overall science plan tied together the target sites and crew training and is still used and updated by increment for ISS crews today. Due to the extensive training ISS astronauts receive regarding all aspects of their missions, CEO training is limited to 4 hours. Typically this training occurs during the early part of the training cycle. Since an
8. Lulla, Dessinov, Evans, Dickerson, and Robinson, Dynamic Earth Environments.
83Psychology of Space Exploration
ISS mission is longer than a Shuttle mission, the number of targets per increment varies from approximately 140 to 160 sites, and they are updated with the change of each ISS increment.The digital camera, a Kodak 460 DSC, was introduced on STS-73; however, the Hasselblad film camera remained the favorite of the Shuttle crews, most likely because of their experience with that camera. Improvements in digital technology coincided with the change in focus of the Shuttle program to the assembly of the International Space Station. Following the Space Shuttle Columbia accident in 2003, NASA’s support of Earth observations by crewmembers has been focused on the ISS. Although SSEOP was dissolved, individual Shuttle crewmembers on mis-sions to the ISS could still use the on-board cameras to take images of Earth, but without scientific support.
Earth Observation in Human Spaceflight Today
The digital camera was favored by ISS crews over the film cameras because it allowed them to review their imagery while on orbit. The immediate review of their imagery enabled the crews to view and improve their photographic techniques. Digital images could also be down-linked to the CEO scientists for review, and the scientists in turn could provide feedback to the crew. The issue of film versus digital cameras was settled in 2003 when mission length was extended to about six months. The extension of crew time on orbit made film more susceptible to radiation “fog-ging.” While digital cameras are not immune to radiation, they are better able to cope with longer exposures to the space environment, and eliminating the need to return film to Earth was also an important improvement.With the use of the 400-millimeter lens and 2× extender available for the dig-ital camera, ISS crews have been able to document dynamic events at a higher resolution than was possible from the Shuttle with the 250-millimeter lens.9 The 400- and 800- millimeter lens options are clearly the favorites of ISS crews. An additional benefit of the camera is the automatic logging of the time as well as
9. Julie A. Robinson and Cynthia A. Evans, “Space Station Allows Remote Sensing of Earth to Within Six Meters,” Eos, Transactions, American Geophysical Union 83 (2002): 185, 188.
84Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—
Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
the date the image was acquired, along with other camera settings. Currently, the Kodak 760 DSC is used for CEO; however, this camera was upgraded with the higher resolution Nikon D2x in the latter part of 2008.In addition to watching Earth, ISS crewmembers photograph Earth through the windows of the ISS and are able to share those images with the world. The CEO activity provides a venue to transmit requests for photographs of areas of sci-entific or public interest to the astronauts each day and to distribute the acquired photographs to scientists and the public. Crewmembers take photographs of the targets during their free or unscheduled time; Earth photography is never a sched-uled crew activity. A list of candidate targets is sent to them on a daily basis, and crewmembers can make attempts to photograph those targets, choose to take no images, or, on their own initiative, photograph Earth at any time. These self-initiated images would seem to be of special importance to crewmembers since the taking of these images is purely volitional. Whether requested by scientists or self-initiated, images of Earth taken from the ISS are identified and distributed via the Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth Web site.10
Earth Observation and Behavioral Health in Human Spaceflight
While NASA has always engaged in space exploration research, The Vision for Space Exploration and subsequent definitions of specific exploration mission archi-tectures have required a much more focused use of the ISS.11 In particular, the ISS is to be used for research on human health on long-duration space missions, as well as for technology development and testing.12 Behavioral health and performance has been identified as a discipline with additional research needs requiring the ISS.13
10. NASA, Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth Web site, http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov.11. NASA, The Vision for Space Exploration (Washington, DC: NASA NP-2004-01-334-HQ, 2004), pp. 15–17.12. NASA, “The NASA Research and Utilization Plan for the International Space Station (ISS), A Report to the Committee on Science of the United States House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the United States Senate, NASA Headquarters” (Washington, DC: NASA Headquarters, 2006), pp. 1–20.13. NASA, Bioastronautics Roadmap: A Risk Reduction Strategy for Human Space Exploration (Houston, TX: NASA Johnson Space Center SP-2004-6113, 2005), p. 5; John R. Ball and
85Psychology of Space Exploration
Maximizing psychological well-being and performance of the crew, while in a con-fined space with interpersonal interactions limited to a small number of people, is important for the success of ongoing ISS missions. Knowledge about behavioral health gained from ISS missions is also important for the success of future missions to a lunar base and provides key data for a four- to six-month Mars transit. A par-ticular concern is maintaining crew psychological well-being for the duration of a round-trip mission to Mars that could last as long as three years.14Positive (or “salutogenic”) experiences while in space may promote psycholog-ical well-being by enhancing personal growth and may be important for offsetting the challenges of living and working in a confined and isolated environment.15 In a survey of flown astronauts aimed at identifying the positive or salutogenic effects of spaceflight, Eva Ihle and colleagues identified positive changes in perceptions of Earth as the most important change experienced by astronauts.16If viewing Earth is an important component of positive experiences in space-flight, then having Earth “out of view” may be an important challenge for crews going to Mars because it could increase the sense of isolation.17 To the extent that observing Earth is a positive experience for ISS crewmembers, replacement activi-ties or new psychological countermeasures may be needed to ensure the well-being of crewmembers on a Mars mission.
Charles H. Evans, Jr., eds., Safe Passage: Astronaut Care for Exploration Missions (Washington, DC: Committee on Creating a Vision for Space Medicine During Travel Beyond Earth Orbit, Board on Health Sciences Policy, National Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press, 2001), pp. 136–171.14. NASA, Bioastronautics Roadmap, p. 12.15. Peter Suedfeld, “Applying Positive Psychology in the Study of Extreme Environments,” Journal of Human Performance in Extreme Environments 6 (2001): 21–25; Peter Suedfeld and Tara Weiszbeck, “The Impact of Outer Space on Inner Space,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 75, no. 7, supplement (2004): C6–C9.16. Eva C. Ihle, Jennifer Boyd Ritsher, and Nick Kanas, “Positive Psychological Outcomes of Spaceflight: An Empirical Study,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 77 (2006): 93–101.17. Nick Kanas and Dietrich Manzey, Space Psychology and Psychiatry (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003), p. 186.
86Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—
Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
Objectives
In this paper, we mine the dataset of Earth observation photography to see whether additional information could be gleaned about the importance to crew-members of the positive experience of viewing Earth. Our first objective was to quantify the extent to which photography of Earth was self-initiated. A second objective was to identify patterns in photography, or conditions under which crew-members were more likely to take self-initiated images. From this we hoped to gain quantitative (although correlative) insight into whether Earth observation activ-ities are important to long-duration crewmembers on the ISS and use this to infer whether Earth observation activities might play a role in maintaining the psycho-logical well-being of at least some of these crewmembers.
Hypotheses
Prior to analyzing the photographic incidence data, we generated the follow-ing hypotheses:Hypothesis 1: Fewer self-initiated images are expected to be taken during periods of, and preparation for, extraordinary activities. Daily activities on the Station can be very crudely dichotomized into regular daily activities and extraor-dinary activities. Extraordinary activities include EVAs as well as docking and undocking (i.e., of Space Shuttle, Soyuz, and Progress spacecraft). Further, these extraordinary activities require substantial focus and preparation leading up to the event. These extraordinary activities generally consume more time than regular daily activities, leaving less time for volitional activities such as taking images. In the mission timelines, extensive EVA and docking preparation ramps up prior to an event, with restrictions on the ability to schedule other, noncritical activities beginning one week prior to the EVA, so we considered one week prior as our prep-aration period.Hypothesis 2: More self-initiated images are expected to be taken during weekends or other light-duty times. Typically, crewmembers have fewer set tasks to accomplish on weekends, so they have increased periods of time in which they can choose their activities. Given the volitional nature of self-initiated images coupled with the enjoyment crews have stated that they receive from viewing
87Psychology of Space Exploration
Earth, we expected crewmembers to take more Earth photographs during periods of decreased workload.Hypothesis 3: More self-initiated images are expected to be taken of geo-graphic areas of personal interest to crewmembers. Past crews have placed great importance on viewing Earth,18 and most Shuttle and ISS crewmembers have requested support in photographing their hometowns and other places of personal interest. If such interest provides an indirect linkage of crewmembers in space to the people and place they have left behind, the photographing of places that hold spe-cial meaning for crewmembers, such as their childhood home or their alma mater, might be expected to be of particular relevance.Hypothesis 4a: Phasing occurs such that differing numbers of self-initiated images will be taken over the course of a mission. Hypothesis 4b: During the third quarter of the mission, increased numbers of self-initiated images will be taken. Previous research, both in space and in analog environments such as the Antarctic, has found mixed results regarding the existence of either phasing or a third-quarter effect.19 The term phasing suggests that isolated individuals experience a cycle of ups and downs in psychological well-being during their time in confine-ment. While the term phasing is more general, the term third-quarter effect specifi-cally refers to a period of lowered psychological well-being during the third quarter of an extended confinement. Thus, we looked for several possible temporal patterns in the incidence of self-initiated photography.
18. Ihle et al., “Positive Psychological Outcomes of Spaceflight”: 93–101.19. Robert B. Bechtel and Amy Berning, “The Third-Quarter Phenomenon: Do People Experience Discomfort After Stress Has Passed?” in From Antarctica to Outer Space: Life in Isolation and Confinement, ed. Albert A. Harrison, Yvonne A. Clearwater, and Christopher P. McKay (New York: Springer Verlag, 1991), pp. 261–266; Mary M. Connors, Albert A. Harrison, and Faren R. Akins, Living Aloft: Human Requirements for Extended Spaceflight (Washington, DC: NASA SP-483, 1985); Nick Kanas, Daniel S. Weiss, and Charles R. Marmar, “Crew Member Interactions During a Mir Space Station Simulation,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 67 (1996), 969–975; Gro M. Sandal, “Coping in Antarctica: Is It Possible to Generalize Results Across Settings?” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 71, no. 9, supplement (2000): A37–A43; Jack W. Stuster, Claude Bachelard, and Peter Suedfeld, “The Relative Importance of Behavioral Issues During Long-Duration ICE Missions,” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 71, no. 9, supplement (2000): A17–A25.
88Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—
Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
METHODS
Participants
Images taken by up to 19 ISS crewmembers, beginning with ISS Expedition 4 (December 2001, when the full capability of the digital camera began to be used) and continuing through Expedition 11 (October 2005), were included in this study. Ten were astronauts with NASA, and nine were Russian cosmonauts. The expe-ditions consisted of three crewmembers through Expedition 6, when the number of crewmembers on the Station dropped to two, one Russian and one American. Gender of the crew for Expeditions 4 through 11 was predominantly male with only one female astronaut. It is not known whether every individual on board the ISS actually used the camera, nor which individuals took which images.
Data and Analyses
Digital photographs are taken on orbit and downlinked to the ground during the course of the mission. These are separated by content (Earth, hardware, peo-ple). All Earth images become part of the Database of Astronaut Photography of Earth, which was used for these analyses and is available online.20We analyzed the Earth photography patterns using the digital data recorded on the back of the digital cameras used on the ISS. The cameras automatically record the date and time when the photograph was taken, as well as specific photographic parameters. The data do not identify the individuals using the camera, as any crew-member may pick up any camera to take pictures, and individuals often stop briefly at a window to take pictures throughout the day. Crews are cross-trained in the use of the imagery equipment. Some crews share the responsibility of taking images of Earth; in other crews, one member might have more interest and thus be the pri-mary photographer. Regardless, crewmembers report photographing areas known to be of interest to fellow crewmembers.
20. NASA, Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth Web site, http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov (accessed 9 December 2010).
89Psychology of Space Exploration
Additional datasets compiled for use in analyses were 1) lists of areas of known geographic interest to crews based on publicly released biographical information, 2) orbital track parameters to relate images taken to the log of scientific requests sent to the crew, and 3) records of on-orbit activities to determine the incidence of EVAs, the docking of visiting vehicles, and days of light duty/holidays. We used the orbit tracks and message logs to identify which photographs were in response to CEO requests and which were self-initiated by the crew. Occasionally, battery changes and camera resets were conducted on orbit without resetting the date and time on the camera. Because of this, not all camera time stamps were accurate. We screened those data for inaccuracies (such as an incorrect year for a specific expedi-tion), and these records were eliminated from the analyses.For each day, we determined the number of images of Earth that were self-initiated, were of areas of known geographic interest to any member of that crew, were in response to a scientific request, and used the 800-millimeter (high-magnification) lens setup. The use of the 800-millimeter lens was tracked because it represents a significant skill that requires much effort to achieve the best results, and the resulting images provide the most detail (up to 6-meter spatial resolu-tion). The crewmembers must practice tracking the motion of Earth beneath the ISS using the camera equipped with the 800-millimeter lens and learn how to focus properly through the lens.21 Although this was not one of our original hypotheses, we realized that use of the 800-millimeter lens could be an indica-tor of crew interest in Earth photography as a challenging, self-motivated hobby.In general terms, the analyses looked for relationships between self-initiated image-taking and when the images were taken, as well as between self-initiated image-taking and the geographic location of those images. For the benefit of sta-tistically minded readers, hypotheses 1 and 2 were addressed by examining zero order correlations and using general linear models in a statistical analysis package (GLIMMIX [generalized linear mixed models] procedure in SAS). This procedure fits generalized linear mixed models to the data and allows for normally distributed (Gaussian) random effects.22 Hypothesis 3 was tested using a related procedure that could incorporate categorical data into the model (GENMOD procedure for gen-
21. Robinson and Evans, “Space Station Allows Remote Sensing of Earth to Within Six Meters”: 185.22. SAS, The GLIMMIX Procedure (Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc., June 2006), p. 5, available at http://support.sas.com/rnd/app/papers/glimmix.pdf (accessed 5 May 2006).
90Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—
Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
eralized linear models in SAS). Hypothesis 4a was tested using regression, while general linear model repeated measures analysis was used for hypothesis 4b.
RESULTS
From December 2001 (Expedition 4) through October 2005 (Expedition 11), crewmembers took 144,180 images that had accurate time and date data automat-ically recorded by the camera. Of time-stamped photographs, 84.5 percent were crew-initiated and not in response to CEO requests.
Comparison of Variables
These comparisons were made by examining the degree to which the variables are related (correlation), the average for each variable (mean), and the degree to which the values for a variable differ from its average (standard deviation). See table 1 for all measures included in the study. For subsequent analyses, we considered only self-initiated images and excluded images taken in response to CEO requests.The correlations presented in table 1 provide a preliminary examination of the data rather than a formal test of the hypotheses. When conducting statistical analy-ses, correlations typically are examined first, and then a priori hypotheses are tested using more robust statistical approaches. Based on the correlations in table 1, the following inferences can be made.A crewmember with a camera in hand was more likely to take self-initiated photos in addition to the requested images (self-initiated images were correlated with requested images—r = .36, p < .01). Also, 800 millimeters was the focal length more frequently chosen when crewmembers took images of their own choice, even though taking images at 800 millimeters was more challenging (self-initiated images were correlated with images taken at an 800-millimeter focal length—r = .41, p < .01). Further, crewmembers also were more likely to take self-initiated images of geographic areas of Earth that were of personal interest to them (r = .25, p < .01). A crew containing a member, for example, whose childhood home was in a small town in Illinois, would be more likely to take images of that area than of areas not holding personal significance for any member of that crew.
91Psychology of Space Exploration
Table 1. Means, standard deviations, and correlations across all missions. Each parameter is measured on a daily basis across all expeditions combined.
Daily Number of:
Mean
Std. Dev.
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
Total images taken
102.3
119.1
—
2
Self-initiated images taken
86.4
107.5
.98**
—
3
Images of geographic interest
1.6
5.1
.25**
.25**
—
4
Requested images taken
15.9
25.3
.54**
.36**
.10**
—
5
Images taken with 800-mm
17.8
34.4
.41**
.41**
.15**
.19**
—
Proportion of Days:
Mean
Std. Dev.
1
2
3
4
5
6
6
Higher availability to take images
.3
.4
.06*
.07**
-.01
-.03
.07**
—
* Correlation is significant at the .05 level (2-tailed). ** Correlation is significant at the .01 level (2-tailed).
Crews were more likely to take self-initiated images on weekends (self-initiated images correlated with weekends—r = .07, p < .01) However, contrary to expecta-tions, neither activity nor holiday was related to self-initiated images (due to space limitations, the variables of weekends, activities, and holidays are not included in table 1). It could be that crewmembers did not necessarily have more time avail-able on holidays or that self-initiated images are more tightly linked to scientist-requested approaches to the window. To address the possibility that holidays and planned activities were not indicative of whether crewmembers had time available to take self-initiated images, the variables of holiday, weekend, and activity were combined to create a measure of general availability to take images. Using this new measure of general availability, we found that crewmembers were more likely to take self-initiated images when they had time available (general availability was correlated with self-initiated images—r = .07, p < .01).
92Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—
Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
Figure 1. Probability that self-initiated images were taken, using activity as a predictor across mission.
Tests of Hypotheses
Hypothesis 1: Activity. Hypothesis 1 stated that fewer self-initiated images would be taken one week prior to and during extraordinary mission events, such as EVAs and dockings. The data analysis supported this hypothesis. Crewmembers were less likely to take self-initiated images while preparing for and during these mission events than during regular daily station activities. To state in statistical terms, con-ditional upon the degree of variability that could not be described by the model (the random effect of the intercept) and controlling for time (days) on the ISS, the type of activity on the Station predicted whether self-initiated images were taken (t = –2.50, p < .01). Further, crewmembers were more likely to take self-initiated images on days of regular Station activities as the mission progressed. In other words, the longer crew-members had been on orbit, the more likely they were to take self-initiated images (the effect of activity also was different over time—t = –4.65, p < .01) (see figure 1).
93Psychology of Space Exploration
Figure 2. Probability that self-initiated images were taken, using general availability as a predictor across mission.
Extraordinary mission events, along with the period spent in orbit, influenced whether or not images were taken each day but did not influence the number of images taken on a given day. To use other words, although general activity predicted whether or not any photographic activity occurred, it did not predict the number of self-initiated images taken during regular or extraordinary mission events (t = –.77, not significant [ns]).Hypothesis 2: Weekends. According to hypothesis 2, more self-initiated images would be taken on weekends. This hypothesis was not supported (t = .65, ns), perhaps because life on the Station does not always allow weekends off. This finding, in apparent conflict with the preliminary finding that self-initiated images taken were correlated with weekends, is due to hypothesis 2’s being tested with more robust statistical methods than those of correlation alone.
94Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—
Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
In response to this supposition, the composite variable of days available, or general availability, was used to reflect workload on the ISS more accurately. This composite took into account whether activity on the Station was extraordinary, whether it was a weekend, and whether a particular day was considered an off or partial-duty day or a regular-duty day. General availability was thus a more realistic representation of days with crewmember free time.This post hoc hypothesis was supported. Regarding the taking of images, more self-initiated images were taken when crewmember schedules allowed (see figure 2). Crewmembers were less likely to take self-initiated images on a Saturday, for example, if they were also preparing for an EVA. In more statistical terms, general availability was associated with whether self-initiated images were taken (t = 4.37, p < .01), conditional upon the intercept and after controlling for time on the Station. Additionally, later in the mission, crewmembers became even more likely to take self-initiated images when their schedules allowed, indicating that general availability predicted differentially as the mission progressed (t = 2.26, p = .02).Regarding the number of images taken, the longer crewmembers had available time, the more images they took. In more statistical terms, general availability pre-dicted the number of self-initiated images taken (t = 2.10, p = .02) after controlling for the intercept and time on the Station. Further, crewmembers took just as many images when they had time available at the beginning of the mission as at the end of the mission. In other words, general availability did not differentially predict over the length of the mission (t = –1.22, ns).Hypothesis 3: Geographic interest. Hypothesis 3 stated that crewmembers would take more self-initiated images of areas that were of personal interest to them.23 This hypothesis was not supported by the data (?2 (df = 1) = 1.14, ns). Crewmembers were no more likely to take self-initiated images of geographic areas of personal interest to them than they were to take any other self-initiated images. The fidelity of the measure of areas of personal interest is questionable, though. The geographic areas of interest were determined by our survey methods rather than by direct reports from crewmembers themselves.
23. Due to limitations in the GLIMMIX procedure, a model fitting geographic interest could not converge. As an alternative, the GENMOD procedure was used. Given that GLIMMIX uses the GENMOD procedure to fit generalized linear models when random effects are absent, this change in statistical procedure is not significant.
95Psychology of Space Exploration
Figure 3. Quarterly estimated marginal mean number of self-initiated images taken by mission.
Hypotheses 4a and 4b: Phasing/third-quarter effects. Hypothesis 4a stated that phasing would occur such that self-initiated images would be taken differ-entially across the mission. This hypothesis was supported in that the number of self-initiated images taken is not consistent across the duration of the mission. Statistically, the quadratic term of the regression equation used to assess curvilin-earity in the data was significant (R2 = .02, p < .01). The temporal effects identi-fied in the tests of hypothesis 1 and, to a lesser extent, hypothesis 2 lend further support to hypothesis 4a. Conditional upon the type of activity, the longer the crewmembers were on the Station, the more likely they were to take self-initiated images. In more statistical terms, when using type of activity as a predictor, time on the Station was a significant predictor of whether self-initiated images would be taken (t = 3.16, p < .01).Hypothesis 4b stated that greater numbers of self-initiated images would be taken during the third quarter of the mission. This hypothesis was not supported; figure 3 effectively illustrates the lack of a third-quarter effect. The statistical method used to test hypothesis 4b was general linear model repeated measures.
96Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—
Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
Figure 4. Example of a crew-initiated image of São Paulo, Brazil, at night. While staying on the ISS, astronaut Don Pettit assembled a homemade tracking system to photograph long-exposure images under low light conditions. (Image number ISS006-E-44689, 12 April 2003)
DISCUSSION
In this study, we made novel use of data available on the patterns of Earth pho-tography by crews aboard the International Space Station. Although the data are observational, they allow additional insights into the role that observing Earth plays in the daily lives of crews in orbit. Perhaps the most important observation is the importance that photography of Earth has for at least some crewmembers, as evidenced by the degree to which it is self-initiated (84.5 percent of 144,180 pho-tographs) and conducted as a leisure activity (for an example, see figure 4). As of mid-2006, active photography of Earth has continued, with a total over 250,000 images taken through Expedition 13.Earth photography also offers several venues for personal accomplishments for ISS crewmembers. For example, the use of motion tracking with the 800-millimeter lens combination to achieve high-quality, high-magnification images of Earth is a challenge that some crewmembers have relished. Anecdotally, some crewmembers
97Psychology of Space Exploration
Figure 5. Example of a crew-initiated image using the 800-millimeter lens combination. This view shows a portion of an image of the Golden Gate Bridge, San Francisco, California, taken by astronaut Jeff Williams from the ISS during Expedition 13. Expedition 13 held the record for the largest number of Earth images taken during an expedition (74,266 Earth images taken) until it was surpassed when Jeff Williams was again on the ISS (this time with Soichi Noguchi and T. J. Creamer) during Expedition 22 (88,779 images), November 2009–March 2010. (Image number ISS013-E-65111, 6 August 2006)
98Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—
Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
Figure 6. View of Mount McKinley (Denali), Alaska, taken from the ISS using a powerful 800-millimeter lens to photograph this peak while the spacecraft was over the Gulf of Alaska, 800 miles to the south of the mountain. Cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev has assembled a collection of these views of major world mountain peaks during his stays on the ISS during Expeditions 1 and 11. (Image number ISS011-E-11806, 14 August 2005)
do not try to use the combination; others make it a personal challenge, and several crewmembers have become expert at its use, taking many thousands of such images during their mission (for an example, see figure 5). We cannot distinguish whether the most important element of this activity is taking and sharing these sometimes astounding images of Earth, the challenge of learning/perfecting a new skill, or a combination (for an example, see figure 6).The correlation between scientific requests and self-initiated photography might reflect the practicality of a crewmember who continues to photograph Earth once he/she has a camera in hand. However, it is also suggestive of the impor-tance of the scientific basis and public use of photographs in making the activ-ity worthwhile for the crews. The scientific support from Crew Earth Observations enables self-initiated photography of Earth by providing opportunities and remind-ers to go to the window with a camera. It is likely that the image identification and Web distribution completed by CEO adds value to the self-initiated photography
99Psychology of Space Exploration
by ensuring that it can be shared with the world—but confirming this hypothesis would required a more structured survey of crewmembers. The database structure of CEO also adds personal value to crewmembers, making it easier for them to search for images they have taken for their own use.From our analyses for hypotheses 1 and 2, self-initiated images were less likely to be taken when workload prevented it—and since 84.5 percent of images taken are self-initiated, Earth photography is clearly a leisure activity. However, crews are more likely to take self-initiated images as the mission progresses—perhaps due to acclimation and familiarity with life and duties on the Station or a growing real-ization that their time in space, and thus their ability to photograph Earth from space, is limited. This trend over the duration of the mission was the only mission phasing observed. A more careful examination of figure 3 suggests that the phasing effect might be due more to individual differences pertaining to specific missions or perhaps to an increasing competency with the photographic equipment. It is not clear to what extent this phasing effect might reflect differences in mission profiles or characteristics of the particular crewmembers assigned to the particular missions.
Future Research and Applications
In spite of the importance of behavioral health and performance for the suc-cess of human spaceflight missions, relatively few studies have been done on the ISS to date.24 This analysis of data collected for other purposes serves as an exam-ple of mining data collected as part of ISS operations to increase knowledge. Such analyses can inform surveys for future data collection and influence future behav-ioral studies on the ISS. Given these observations, future studies should consider crew motivations in photographing Earth. Psychological component testing could reveal whether taking more self-initiated images is associated with increased crew psychological well-being.
24. Cynthia A. Evans, Julie A. Robinson, Judy Tate-Brown, Tracy Thumm, Jessica Crespo-Richey, David Baumann, and Jennifer Rhatigan, International Space Station Science Research Accomplishments During the Assembly Years: An Analysis of Results from 2000–2008 (Houston, TX: NASA Johnson Space Center, NASA/TP-2009-213146–REVISION A, 2009), pp. 110–159.
100Patterns in Crew-Initiated Photography of Earth from the ISS—
Is Earth Observation a Salutogenic Experience?
The importance of viewing Earth as reported in crew surveys, crewmember anecdotes to CEO personnel (and the published quotations in the introduction), and the patterns in photography of Earth reported in our analysis all point to a pos-itive psychological role on the part of these activities. Conclusions from this type of correlative data mining are only suggestive of the importance of Earth observa-tion for crewmembers. Future studies of behavioral health should consider quantita-tive assessment of salutogenic effects of leisure activities such as Earth observations.As we begin to plan for interplanetary missions, it is important to consider what types of activities could be substituted. Perhaps the crewmembers best suited to a Mars transit are those individuals who can get a boost to psychological well-being from scientific observations and astronomical imaging. Replacements for the challenge of mastering 800-millimeter photography could also be identified. As humans head beyond low-Earth orbit, crewmembers looking at Earth will only see a pale-blue dot, and then, someday in the far future, they will be too far away to view Earth at all.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Edna Fiedler and Frank Carpenter for their encour-agement to pursue these analyses. Chuck Green advised us on the statistical anal-yses and helped with access to SAS procedures. We also thank Cindy Evans, Edna Fiedler, and Nick Kanas for their reviews and suggestions for improvement.
101