IF YOU THINK that this book appears to be thicker and contain more words than you
found in the first published edition of Stranger in a Strange Land, your observation is correct. This
edition is the original one-the way Robert Heinlein first conceived it, and put it down on paper.
The earlier edition contained a few words over 160,000, while this one runs around 220,000
words. Robert's manuscript copy usually contained about 250 to 300 words per page, depending on
the amount of dialogue on the pages. So, taking an average of about 275 words, with the
manuscript running 800 pages, we get a total of 220,000 words, perhaps a bit more.
This book was so different from what was being sold to the general public, or to the science
fiction reading public in 1961 when it was published, that the editors required some cutting and
removal of a few scenes that might then have been offensive to public taste.
The November 1948 issue of Astounding Science Fiction contained a letter to the editor
suggesting titles for the issue of a year hence. Among the titles was to be a story by Robert A.
Heinlein-"Gulf."
In a long conversation between that editor, John W. Campbell, Jr., and Robert, it was
decided that there would be sufficient lead time to allow all the stories that the fan had titled to be
written, and the magazine to come out in time for the November 1949 date. Robert promised to
deliver a short story to go with the title. Most of the other authors also went along with the gag.
This issue came to be known as the "Time Travel" issue.
Robert's problem, then, was to find a story to fit the title assigned to him.
So we held a "brainstorming" session. Among other unsuitable notions, I suggested a story
about a human infant, raised by an alien race. The idea was just too big for a short story, Robert
said, but he made a note about it. That night he went into his study, and wrote some lengthy notes,
and set them aside.
For the title "Gulf" he wrote quite a different story.
The notes sat in a file for several years, at which time Robert began to write what was to be
Stranger in a Strange Land. Somehow, the story didn't quite jell, and he set it aside. He returned to
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 2 -
the manuscript a few times, but it was not finished until 1960: this was the version you now hold in
your hands.
In the context of 1960, Stranger in a Strange Land was a book that his publishers feared-it
was too far off the beaten path. So, in order to mini~ mize possible losses, Robert was asked to cut
the manuscript down to 150,000 words-a loss of about 70,000 words. Other changes were also
requested, before the editor was willing to take a chance on publication.
To take out about a quarter of a long, complicated book was close to an impossible task.
But, over the course of some months, Robert accomplished it. The final word count came out at
160,087 words. Robert was convinced that it was impossible to cut out any more, and the book was
accepted at that length.
For 28 years it remained in print in that form.
In 1976, Congress passed a new Copyright Law, which said, in part, that in the event an
author died, and the widow or widower renewed the copyright, all old contracts were cancelled
Robert died in 1988, and the following year the copyright for Stranger in a Strange Land came up
for renewal.
Unlike many other authors, Robert had kept a copy of the original typescript, as submitted
for publication~ on file at the library of the University of California at Santa Cruz, his archivists. I
asked for a copy of that manuscript, and read that and the published versions side by side. And I
came to the conclusion that it had been a mistake to cut the book.
So I sent a copy of the typescript to Eleanor Wood, Robert's agent. Eleanor also read the
two versions together, and agreed with my verdict. So, after the notification to the publisher, she
presented them with a copy of the new/old version.
No one remembered the fact that such drastic cutting had been done on this book; over the
course of years all the editors and senior officers at the publishing house had changed. So this
version was a complete surprise to them.
They decided to publish the original version, agreeing that it was better than the cut one.
You now have in your hands the original version of Stranger in a Strange Land, as written
by Robert Anson Heinlein.
The given names of the chief characters have great importance to the plot. They were
carefully selected: Jubal means "the father of all," Michael stands for "Who is like God
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 3 -
The first human expedition from Terra to Mars was selected on the theory that the greatest
danger to man in space was man himself. At that time, only eight Terran years after the founding of
the first human colony on Luna, any interplanetary trip made by humans necessarily had to be
made in weary free-fail orbits, doubly tangent semi-ellipses--from Terra to Mars, two hundred
fifty-eight days, the same for the return journey, plus four hundred fifty-five days waiting at Mars
while the two planets crawled slowly back into relative positions which would permit shaping the
doubly-tangent orbit-a total of almost three Earth years.
Besides its wearing length, the trip was very chancy. Only by refueling at a space station,
then tacking back almost into Earth's atmosphere, could thi5 primitive flying coffin, the Envoy,
make the trip at all. Once at Mars she might be able to return-if she did not crash in landing, if
water could be found on Man to fill her reaction-mass tanks, if some sort of food could be found on
Mars, if a thousand other things did not go wrong.
But the physical danger was judged to be less important than the psychological stresses.
Eight humans, crowded together like monkeys for almost three Terran years, had better get along
much better than humans usually did. An all-male crew had been vetoed as unhealthy and sociaily
unstable from lessons learned earlier. A ship's company of four married couples had been decided
on as optimum, if the necessary specialties could be found in such a combination.
The University of Edinburgh, prime contractor, sub-contracted crew selection to the
Institute for Social Studies. After discarding the chaff of volunteers useless through age, health,
mentality, training, or temperament, the Institute still had over nine thousand candidates to work
from, each sound in mind and body and having at least one of the necessary special skills. It was
expected that the Institute would report several acceptable four-couple crews.
No such crew was found. The major skills needed were astrogator, medical doctor, cook,
machinist, ship's commander, semantician, chemical engineer, electronics engineer, physicist,
geologist, biochemist, biologist, atomics engineer, photographer, hydroponicist, rocket engineer.
Each crew member would have to possess more than one skill, or be able to acquire extra skills in
time. There were hundreds of possible combinations of eight people possessing these skills; there
turned up three combinations of four married couples possessing them, plus health and
intelligence.-but in all three cases the group-dynamicists who evaluated the temperament factors for
compatibility threw up their hands in horror.
The prime contractor suggested lowering the compatibility figure-ofmerit; the Institute
stiffly offered to return its one dollar fee. In the meantime a computer programmer whose name
was not recorded had the machines hunt for three-couple rump crews. She found several dozen
compatible combinations, each of which defined by its own characteristics the couple needed to
complete it. In the meantime the machines continued to review the data changing through deaths,
withdrawals, new volunteers, etc.
Captain Michael Brunt, M.S., Cmdr. D. F. Reserve, pilot (unlimited license), and veteran at
thirty of the Moon run, seems to have had an inside track at the Institute, someone who was willing
to look up for him the names of single female volunteers who might (with him) complete a crew,
and then pair his name with these to run trial problems through the machines to determine whether
or not a possible combination would be acceptable. This would account for his action in jetting to
Australia and proposing marriage to Doctor Winifred Coburn, a horse-faced spinster semantician
nine years his senior. The Carlsbad Archives pictured her with an expression of quiet good humor
but otherwise lacking in attractiveness.
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 4 -
Or Brant may have acted without inside information, solely through that trait of intuitive
audacity necessary to command an exploration. In any case lights blinked, punched cards popped
out, and a crew for the Envoy had been found:
Captain Michael Brant, commanding-pilot, astrogator, relief cook, relief photographer,
rocketry engineer;
Dr. Winifred Coburn Brant, forty-one, semantician, practical nurse, stores officer, historian;
Mr. Francis X. Seeney, twenty-eight, executive officer, second pilot, astrogator,
astrophysicist, photographer~
Dr. Olga Kovalic Seeney, twenty-nine, cook, biochemist, hydroponicist;
Dr. Ward Smith, forty-five, physician and surgeon, biologist;
Dr. Mary Jane Lyle Smith, twenty-six, atomics engineer, electronics and power technician;
Mr. Sergei Rimsky, thirty-five, electronics engineer, chemical engineer, practical machinist
& instrumentation man, cryologist;
Mrs. Eleanora Alvarez Rimsky, thirty-two, geologist and selenologist, hydroponicist.
The crew had a well-rounded group of skills, although in some cases their secondary skills
had been acquired by intensive coaching during the last weeks before blast-off. More important,
they were mutually compatible in their temperaments.
Too compatible, perhaps.
The Envoy departed on schedule with no mishaps. During the early part of the voyage her
daily reports were picked up with ease by private listeners. As she drew away and signals became
fainter, they were picked up and rebroadcast by Earth's radio satellites. The crew seemed to be both
healthy and happy. An epidemic of ringworm was the worst that Dr. Smith had to cope with-the
crew adapted to free fall quickly and no antinausea drugs were used after the first week. If Captain
Brant had any disciplinary problems, he did not choose to report them to Earth.
The Envoy achieved a parking orbit just inside the orbit of Phobos and spent two weeks in
photographic survey. Then Captain Brant radioed:
"We will attempt a landing at 1200 tomorrow GST just south of Lacus Soli." No further message
was ever received.
II
IT WAS A QUARTER of an Earth century before Mars was again visited by humans. Six years
after the Envoy was silent, the drone probe Zombie, sponsored jointly by the Geographic Society
and La Société Astronautique Internationale, bridged the void and took up an orbit for the waiting
period, then returned. The photographs taken by the robot vehicle showed a land unattractive by
human standards; her recording instruments confirmed the thinness and unsuitability of the Arean
atmosphere to human life.
But the Zombie's pictures showed clearly that the "canals" were engineering works of some
sort and there were other details which could only be interpreted as ruins of cities. A manned
expedition on a major scale and without delay surely would have been mounted had not World War
III intervened.
But the war and the delay resulted eventually in a much stronger, safer expedition than that
of the lost En my. The Federation Ship Champion, manned by an all-male crew of eighteen
experienced spacemen and carrying more than that number of male pioneers, made the crossing
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 5 -
under Lyle Drive in only nineteen days. The Champion landed just south of Lacus Soli, as Captain
van Tromp intended to search for the Envoy. The second expedition reported to Earth by radio
daily, but three despatches were of more than scientific interest. The first was:
"Rocket Ship Envoy located. No survivors."
The second worldshaker was: "Mars is inhabited."
The third was: "Correction to despatch 23-105: One survivor of Envoy located."
III
CAPTAIN WILLEM VAN TROMP was a man of humanity and good sense. He radioed ahead:
"My passenger must not, repeat, must not be subjected to the strain of a public reception. Provide
low-gee shuttle, stretcher and ambulance service, and anned guard."
He sent his ship's surgeon Dr. Nelson along to make sure that Valentine Michael Smith was
installed in a suite in Bethesda Medical Center, transferred gently into a hydraulic bed, and
protected from outside contact by marine guards. Van Tromp himself went to an extraordinary
session of the Federation High Council.
At the moment when Valentine Michael Smith was being lifted into bed, the High Minister
for Science was saying testily, "Granted, Captain, that your authority as military commander of
what was nevertheless primarily a scientific expedition gives you the right to order unusual medical
service to protect a person temporarily in your charge, I do not see why you now presume to
interfere with the proper functions of my department. Why, Smith is a veritable treasure trove of
scientific information!"
"Yes. I suppose he is, sir."
"Then why-" The science minister broke off and turned to the High Minister for Peace and
Military Security. "David? This matter is obviously now in my jurisdiction. Will you issue the
necessary instructions to your people? After all, one can't keep persons of the caliber of Professor
Kennedy and Doctor Okajima, to mention just two, cooling their heels indefinitely. They won't
stand for it."
The peace minister did not answer but glanced inquiringly at Captain van Tromp. The
captain shook his head. "No, sir."
"Why not?" demanded the science minister. "You have admitted that he isn't sick."
"Give the captain a chance to explain, Pierre," the peace minister advised. "Well, Captain?"
"Smith isn't sick, sir," Captain van Tromp said to the peace minister, "but he isn't well,
either. He has never before been in a one-gravity field. He now weighs more than two and one half
times what he is used to and his muscles aren't up to it. He's not used to Earth-normal air pressure.
He's not used to anything and the strain is likely to be too much for him. Hell's bells, gentlemen,
I'm dog tired myself just from being at one-gee again-and I was born on this planet."
The science minister looked contemptuous. "If acceleration fatigue is all that is worrying
you, let me assure you, my dear Captain, that we had anticipated that. His respiration and heart
action will be watched carefully. We are not entirely without imagination and forethought. After
all, I've been out myself. I know how it feels. This man Smith must-"
Captain van Tromp decided that it was time to throw a tantrum. He could excuse it by his
own fatigue-very real fatigue, he felt as if he had just landed on Jupiter-and he was smugly aware
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 6 -
that even a high councilor could not afford to take too stiff a line with the commander of the first
successful Martian expedition.
So he interrupted with a snort of disgust. "link! 'This man Smith-' This 'man!' Can't you see
that that is just what he is not?"
"Eh?"
"Smith ... is . . . not . . . a . . . man."
"Huh? Explain yourself, Captain."
"Smith is not a man. He is an intelligent creature with the genes and ancestry of a man, but
he is not a man. He's more a Martian than a man. Until we came along he had never laid eyes on a
human being. He thinks like a Martian, he feels like a Martian. He's been brought up by a race
which has nothing in common with us. Why, they don't even have sex. Smith has never laid eyes on
a woman-still hasn't if my orders have been carried out. He's a man by ancestry, a Martian by
environment. Now, if you want to drive him crazy and waste that 'treasure trove of scientific
information,' call in your fat-headed professors and let them badger him. Don't give him a chance to
get well and strong and used to this madhouse planet. Just go ahead and squeeze him like an
orange. It's no skin off me; I've done my job!"
The ensuing silence was broken smoothly by Secretary General Douglas himself. "And a
good job, too, Captain. Your advice will be weighed, and be assured that we will not do anything
hastily. If this man, or manMartian, Smith, needs a few days to get adjusted, I'm sure that science
can wait-so take it easy, Pete. Let's table this part of the discussion, gentlemen, and get on to other
matters. Captain van Tromp is tired."
"One thing won't wait," said the Minister for Public Information.
"Eh, Jock?"
"If we don't show the Man from Mars in the stereo tanks pretty shortly, you'll have riots on
your hands, Mr. Secretary."
"Hmm- You exaggerate, Jock. Mars stuff in the news, of course. Me decorating the captain
and his brave crew-tomorrow, that had better be. Captain van Tromp telling of his experiences-after
a night's rest of course, Captain."
The minister shook his head.
"No good, Jock?"
"The public expected the expedition to bring back at least one real live 
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 7 -
"Mahmoud, sir. No, Doctor Mahmoud is not well. A-a slight nervous breakdown, sir." Van
Tromp reflected that being dead drunk was the moral equivalent thereof.
"Space happy?"
"A little, perhaps." These damned groundhogs!
"Well, fetch him around when he's feeling himself. young man Smith should be of help as
an interpreter."
"Perhaps," van Tromp said doubtfully.
This young man Smith was busy at that moment just staying alive. His body, unbearably
compressed and weakened by the strange shape of space in this unbelievable place, was at last
somewhat relieved by the softness of the nest in which these others had placed him. He dropped the
effort of sustaining it, and turned his third level to his respiration and heart beat.
He saw at once that he was about to consume himself. His lungs were beating almost as
hard as they did at home, his heart was racing to distribute the influx, ail in an attempt to cope with
the squeezing of space-and this in a situation in which he was smothered by a poisonously rich and
dangerously hot atmosphere. He took immediate steps.
When his heart rate was down to twenty per minute and his respiration almost
imperceptible, he set them at that and watched himself long enough to assure himself that he would
not inadvertently discorporate while his attention was elsewhere. When he was satisfied that they
were running properly, he set a tiny portion of his second level on guard and withdrew the rest of
himself. It was necessary to review the configurations of these many new events in order to fit them
to himself, then cherish and praise them-lest they swallow him up.
Where should he start? When he had left home, enfolding these others who were now his
own nestlings? Or simply at his arrival in this crushed space? He was suddenly assaulted by the
lights and sounds of that arrival, feeling it again with mind-shaking pain. No, he was not yet ready
to cherish and embrace that configuration-back! back! back beyond his first sight of these others
who were now his own. Back even before the healing which had followed his first grokking of the
fact that he was not as his nestling brothers . . . back to the nest itself.
None of his thinkings had been in Earth symbols. Simple English he had freshly learned to
speak, but much less easily than a Hindu uses it to trade with a Turk. Smith used English as one
might use a code book, with tedious and imperfect translation for each symbol. Now his thoughts,
pure Martian abstractions from half a million years of wildly alien culture, traveled so far from any
human experience as to be utterly untranslatable.
In the adjoining room an inteme, Dr. "Tad" Thaddeus, was playing cribbage with Tom
Meechum, Smith's special nurse. Thaddeus had one eye on his dials and meters and both eyes on
his cards; nevertheless he noted every heart beat of his patient. When a flickering light changed
from ninety-two pulsations per minute to less than twenty, he pushed the cards aside, jumped to his
feet, and hurried into Smith's room with Meechum at his heels.
The patient floated in the flexible skin of the hydraulic bed. He appeared to be dead.
Thaddeus swore briefly and snapped, "Get Doctor Nelson!"
Meechum said, "Yessir!" and added, "How about the shock gear, Doe? He's far gone."
"Gel Doctor Nelson!"
The nurse rushed out. The interne examined the patient as closely as possible but refrained
from touching him. He was still doing so when an older doctor came in, walking with the labored
awkwardness of a man long in space and not yet adjusted to high gravity. "Well, Doctor?"
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 8 -
"Patient's respiration, temperature, and pulse dropped suddenly, uh, about two minutes ago,
sir."
"What have you done for him, or to him?"
"Nothing, sir. Your instructions-"
"Good." Nelson looked Smith over briefly, then studied the instruments back of the bed,
twins of those in the watch room. "Let me know if there is any change." He started to leave.
Thaddeus looked startled. "But, Doctor-" He broke off.
Nelson said grimly, "Go ahead, Doctor. What is your diagnosis?"
"Uh, I don't wish to sound off about your patient, sir."
"Never mind. I asked for your diagnosis."
"Very well, sir. Shock-atypical, perhaps," he hedged, "but shock, leading to termination."
Nelson nodded. "Reasonable enough. But this isn't a reasonable case. Relax, son. I've seen
this patient in this condition half a dozen times during the trip back. It doesn't mean a thing.
Watch." Nelson lifted the patient's right arm, let it go. It stayed where he had left it.
"Catalepsy?" asked Thaddeus.
"Call it that if you like. Calling a tail a leg doesn't make it one. Don't worry about it, Doctor.
There is nothing typical about this case. Just keep him from being bothered and call me if there is
any change." He replaced Smith's arm.
When Nelson had left, Thaddeus took one more look at the patient, shook his head and
joined Meechum in the watch room. Meechum picked up his cards and said, "Crib?"
"No."
Meechuin waited, then added, "Doc, if you ask me, that one in there is a case for the basket
before morning."
"No one asked you."
"My mistake."
"Go out and have a cigarette with the guards. I want to think."
Meechum shrugged and left. Thaddeus opened a bottom drawer, took out a bottle and
poured himself a dose intended to help his thinking. Meechum joined the guards in the corridor;
they straightened up, then saw who it was and relaxed. The taller marine said, "Howdy, pal. What
was the excitement just now?"
"Nothing much. The patient just had quintuplets and we were arguing about what to name
them. Which one of you monkeys has got a butt? And a light?"
The other marine dug a pack of cigarettes out of a pocket. "How're you fixed for Suction?"
he asked bleakly.
"Just middlin'. Thanks." Meechum stuck the cigarette in his face and talked around it.
"Honest to God, gentlemen, I don't know anything about this patient. I wish I did."
"What's the idea of these orders about 'Absolutely No Women'? Is he some kind of a sex
maniac?"
"Not that I know of. All that I know is that they brought him in from the Champion and said
that he was to have absolute quiet."
"'The Champion!' "the first marine said. "Of course! That accounts for it."
"Accounts for what?"
"It stands to reason. He ain't had any, he ain't seen any, he ain't touched any-for months.
And he's sick, see? If he was to lay hands on any, they're afraid he'd kill hisself." He blinked and
blew out a deep breath. "I'll bet I would, under similar circumstances. No wonder they don't want
no bims around him."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 9 -
Smith had been aware of the visit by the doctors but he had grokked at once that their
intentions were benign; it was not necessary for the major part of him to be jerked back from where
he was.
At the hour in the morning when human nurses slap patient's faces with cold, wet cloths
under the pretense of washing them, Smith returned from his journey. He speeded up his heart,
increased his respiration, and again took note of his surroundings, viewing them with serenity. He
looked the room over, noting without discrimination and with praise all its details, both important
and unimportant. He was, in fact, seeing it for the first time, as he had been incapable of enfolding
it when he had been brought there the day before. This commonplace room was not commonplace
to him; there was nothing remotely like it on all Mars, nor did it resemble the wedge-shaPed~
metal-walled compartments of the Champion. But, having relived the events linking his nest to this
place, he was now prepared to accept it, commend it, and in some degree to cherish it.
He became aware that there was another living creature in the room with him. A
granddaddy longlegs was making a futile journey down from the ceiling, spinning as it went. Smith
watched it with delight and wondered if it were a nestling form of man.
Doctor Archer Frame, the interne who had relieved Thaddeus, walked in at that moment.
"Good morning," he said. "How do you feel?"
Smith turned the question over in his mind. The first phrase he recognized as a formal
sound, requiring no answer but which could be repeated-or might not be. The second phrase was
listed in his mind with several possible translations. If Doctor Nelson used it, it meant one thing; if
Captain van Tromp used it, it was a formal sound, needing no reply.
He felt that dismay which so often overtook him in trying to communicate with these
creatures-a frightening sensation unknown to him before he met men. But he forced his body to
remain calm and risked an answer. "Feel good."
"Good!" the creature echoed. "Doctor Nelson will be along in a minute. Feel like some
breakfast?"
All four symbols in the query were in Smith's vocabulary but he had trouble believing that
he had heard them rightly. He knew that he was food, but he did not "feel like" food. Nor had he
had any warning that he might be selected for such an honor. He had not known that the food
supply was such that it was necessary to reduce the corporate group. He was filled with mild regret,
since there was still so much to grok of these new events, but no reluctance.
But he was excused from the effort of translating an answer by the entrance of Dr. Nelson.
The ship's doctor had had little rest and less sleep; he wasted no time on speech but inspected Smith
and the array of dials in silence.
Then he turned to Smith. "Bowels move?" he asked.
Smith understood this; Nelson always asked about it. "No, not yet."
"We'll take care of that. But first you eat. Orderly, fetch in that tray."
Nelson fed him two or three bites, then required him to hold the spoon and feed himself. It
was tiring but gave him a feeling of gay triumph, for it was the first unassisted action he had taken
since reaching this oddly distorted space. He cleaned out the bowl and remembered to ask, "Who is
this?" so that he could praise his benefactor.
"What is this, you mean," Nelson answered. "It's a synthetic food jelly, based on amino
acids-and now you know as much as you did before. Finished? All right, climb out of that bed."
"Beg pardon?" It was an attention symbol which he had learned was useful when
communication failed.
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 10 -
"I said get out of there. Sit up. Stand up. Walk around. You can do it. Sure, you're weak as a
kitten but you'll never put on muscle floating in that bed." Nelson opened a valve at the head of the
bed; water drained out. Smith restrained a feeling of insecurity, knowing that Nelson cherished
him. Shortly he lay on the floor of the bed with the watertight cover wrinkled around him. Nelson
added, "Doctor Frame, take his other elbow. We'll have to help him and steady him."
With Dr. Nelson to encourage him and both of them to help him, Smith stood up and
stumbled over the rim of the bed. "Steady. Now stand up on your own," Nelson directed. "Don't be
afraid. We'll catch you if necessary."
He made the effort and stood alone-a slender young man with underdeveloped muscles and
overdeveloped chest. His hair had been cut in the Champion and his whiskers removed and
inhibited. His most marked feature was his bland, expressionless, almost babyish face-set with eyes
which would have seemed more at home in a man of ninety.
He stood alone for a moment, trembling slightly, then tried to walk. He managed three
shuffling steps and broke into a sunny, childlike smile. "Good boy!" Nelson applauded.
He tried another step, began to tremble violently and suddenly collapsed. They barely
managed to break his fall. "Damn!" Nelson fumed. "He's gone into another one. Here, help me lift
him into the bed. No-fill it first."
Frame did so, cutting off the flow when the cover skin floated six inches from the top. They
lugged him into it, awkwardly because he had frozen into the foetal position. "Get a collar pillow
under his neck," instructed Nelson, "and call me when he comes out of it. No-let me sleep, I need it.
Unless something worries you. We'll walk him again this afternoon and tomorrow we'll start
systematic exercise. In three months I'll have him swinging through the trees like a monkey. There's
nothing really wrong with him."
"Yes, Doctor," Frame answered doubtfully.
"Oh, yes, when he comes out of it, teach him how to use the bathroom. Have the nurse help
you; I don't Want him to fall."
"Yes, sir. Uh, any particular method-I mean, how-"
"Eh? Show him, of course! Demonstrate. He probably won't understand much that you say
to him, but he's bright as a whip. He'll be bathing himself by the end of the week."
Smith ate lunch without help. Presently a male orderly came in to remove his tray. The man
glanced around, then came to the bed and leaned over him. "Listen," he said in a low voice, "I've
got a fat proposition for you."
"Beg pardon?"
"A deal, a bargain, a way for you to make a lot of money fast and easy."
'Money?' What is 'money'?"
"Never mind the philosophy; everybody needs money. Now listen I'll have to talk fast
because I can't stay in here long-and it's taken a lot of fixing to get me in here at all. I represent
Peerless Features. We'll pay you sixty thousand for your exclusive story and it won't be a bit of
trouble to
you-we've got the best ghost writers in the business. You just talk and answer questions; they put it
together." He whipped out a piece of paper. "Just read this and sign it. I've got the down payment
with me."
Smith accepted the paper, stared thoughtfully at it, holding it upside down. The man looked
at him and muffled an exclamation. "Lordyl Don't you read English?"
Smith understood this well enough to answer. "No."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 11 -
"Well- Here, I'll read it to you, then you just put your thumb print in the square and I'll
witness it. 'I, the undersigned, Valentine Michael Smith, sometimes known as the Man from Mars,
do grant and assign to Peerless Features, Limited, all and exclusive rights in my true-fact story to
be titled I Was a Prisoner on Mars in exchange for-"
"Orderly!"
Dr. Frame was standing in the door of the watch room; the paper disappeared into the man's
clothes. "Coming, sir. I was just getting this tray."
"What were you reading?"
"Nothing."
"I saw you. Never mind, come out of there quickly. This patient is not to be disturbed." The
man obeyed; Dr. Frame closed the door behind them. Smith lay motionless for the next half hour,
but try as he might he could not grok it at all.
IV
GILLIAN BOARDMAN WAS CONSIDERED professionally competent as a nurse; she was
judged competent in wider fields by the bachelor internes and she was judged harshly by some
other women. There was no harm in her and her hobby was men. When the grapevine carried the
word that there was a patient in special suite K-12 who had never laid eyes on a woman in his life,
she did not believe it. When detailed explanation convinced her, she resolved to remedy it. She
went on duty that day as floor supervisor in the wing where Smith was housed. As soon as possible
she went to pay a call on the strange patient.
She knew of the "No Female Visitors" rule and, while she did not Consider herself to be a
visitor of any sort, she sailed on past the marine guards without attempting to use the door they
guarded-marines, she had found, had a stuffy habit of construing their orders literally. Instead she
went into the adjacent watch room. Dr. "Tad" Thaddeus was on duty there alone.
He looked up. "Well, if it ain't 'Dimples!' Hi, honey, what brings you here?"
She sat on the corner of his desk and reached for his cigarettes. "'Miss Dimples,' to you,
chum; I'm on duty. This call is part of my rounds. What about your patient?"
"Don't worry your fuzzy head about him, honey chile; he's not your responsibility. See your
order book."
"I read it. I want to have a look at him."
"In one word-no."
"Oh, Tad, don't go regulation on me. I know you."
He gazed thoughtfully at his nails. "Ever worked for Doctor Nelson?"
"No. Why?"
"If I let you put your little foot inside that door, I'd find myself in Antarctica early
tomorrow, prescribing for penguins' chilblains. So switch your fanny out of here and go bother your
own patients. I wouldn't want him even to catch you in this watch room."
She stood up. "Is Doctor Nelson likely to come popping in?"
"Not likely, unless I send for him. He's still sleeping off low-gee fa. tigue."
"So? Then what's the idea of being so duty struck?"
"That's all, Nurse."
"Very well, Doctor!" She added, "Stinker."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 12 -
"Jill!"
"And a stuffed shirt, too."
He sighed. "Still okay for Saturday night?"
She shrugged. "I suppose so. A girl can't be fussy these days." She went back to her duty
station, found that her services were not in immediate demand, picked up the pass key. She was
balked but not beaten, as she recalled that suite K- 12 had a door joining it to the room beyond it, a
room sometimes used as a sitting room when the suite was occupied by a Very Important Person.
The room was not then in use, either as part of the suite or separately. She let herself into it. The
guards at the door beyond paid no attention, unaware that they had been flanked.
She hesitated at the inner door between the two rooms, feeling some of the sharp excitement
she used to feel when sneaking out of student nurses' quarters. But, she told herself, Dr. Nelson was
asleep and Tad wouldn't tell on her even if he caught her. She didn't blame him for keeping his
finger on his number-but he wouldn't report her. She unlocked the door and looked in.
The patient was in bed, he looked at her as the door opened. Her first impression was that
here was a patient too far gone to care. His lack of expression seemed to show the complete apathy
of the desperately ill. Then she saw that his eyes were alive with interest; she wondered if his face
were paralysed? No, she decided; the typical sags were lacking.
She assumed her professional manner. "Well, how are we today? Feeling better?"
Smith translated and examined the questions. The inclusion of herself in the first query was
confusing, but he decided that it might symbolize a wish to cherish and grow close. The second part
matched Nelson's speech forms. "Yes," he answered.
"Good!" Aside from his odd lack of expression she saw nothing strange about him-and if
women were unknown to him, he was certainly managing to conceal it. "Is there anything I can do
for you?" She glanced around, noted that there was no glass on the bedside shelf. "May I get you
water?"
Smith had spotted at once that this creature was different from the others who had come to
see him. Almost as quickly he compared what he was seeing with pictures Nelson had shown him
on the trip from home to this place-pictures intended to explain a particularly difficult and puzzling
configuration of this people group. This, then, was a "woman."
He felt both oddly excited and disappointed. He suppressed both in order that he might grok
deeply, with such success that Dr. Thaddeus noticed no change in the dial readings in the next
room.
But when he translated the last query he felt such a surge of emotion that he almost let his
heartbeat increase. He caught it in time and chided himself for an undisciplined nestling. Then he
checked his translation.
No, he was not mistaken. This woman creature had offered him the water ritual. It wished to
grow closer.
With great effort, scrambling for adequate meanings in his pitifully poor list of human
words, he attempted to answer with due ceremoniousness. "I thank you for water. May you always
drink deep."
Nurse Boardman looked startled. "Why, how sweetl" She found a glass, filled it, and
handed it to him.
He said, "You drink."
Wonder if he thinks I'm trying to poison him? she asked herself-but there was a compelling
quality to his request. She took a sip, whereupon he took the glass from her and took one also, after
which he seemed content to sink back into the bed, as if he had accomplished something important.
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 13 -
Jill told herself that, as an adventure, this was a fizzle. She said, "Well, if you don't need
anything else, I must get on with my work."
She started for the door. He called out, "Not"
She stopped. "Eh? What do you want'~"
"Don't go away."
"Well II have to go, pretty quickly." But she came back to the bedside, "Is there anything
you want?"
He looked her up and down. "You are ... 'woman'?"
The question startled Jill Boardxnafl. Her sex had not been in doubt to the most casual
observer for many years. Her first impulse was to answer flippantly.
But Smith's grave face and oddly disturbing eyes checked her. She became aware
emotionallY that the impossible fact about this patient was true: he did not know what a woman
was. She answered carefully, "Yes, I am a woman,"
Smith continued to stare at her without expression. Jill began to be embarrassed by it. To be
looked at appreciativelY by a male she expected and sometimes enjoyed, but this was more like
being examined under a microscope. She stirred restively. "Well? I look like a woman, don't I?"
"I do not know," Smith answered slowly. "How does woman look? What makes you
woman?"
"Well, for pity's sake!" Jill realized confusedly that this conversation was further out of
hand than any she had had with a male since about her twelfth birthday. "You don't expect me to
take off my clothes and show you',,
Smith took time to examine these verbal symbols and try to translate them. The first group
he could not grok at all. It might be one of those formal sound groups these people so often used . .
. yet it had been spoken with surprising force, as if it might be a last communication before
withdrawaL Perhaps he had so deeply mistaken right conduct in dealing with a woman creature that
the creature might be ready to discorporate at once.
He knew vaguely that he did not want the nurse to die at that moment, even though it was
certainly its right and possibly its obligation to do so. The abrupt change from the rapport of the
Water ritual to a situation in which a newly won water brother might possibly be considering
withdrawal or discorporatiOn would have thrown him into panic had he not been consciOuSlY
suppressing such disturbance. But he decided that if
Jill died now he must die at once also-he could not grok it in any other wise, not after the giving of
water.
The second half of the communication contained only symbols that he had encountered
before. He grokked imperfectly the intention but there seemed to be an implied way Out for him to
avoid this crisis-by acceding to the suggested wish. Perhaps if the woman took its clothes off
neither of them need discorporate. He smiled happily. "Please."
Jill opened her mouth, closed it hastily. She opened it again. "Huh? Well, I'll be darned!"
Smith could grok emotional violence and knew that somehow he had offered the wrong
reply. He began to compose his mind for discorporation, savoring and cherishing all that he had
been and seen, with especial attention to this woman creature. Then he became aware that the
woman was bending over him and he knew somehow that it was not about to die. It looked into his
face. "Correct me if I am wrong," it said, "but were you asking me to take my clothes off?"
The inversions and abstractions required careful translation but Smith managed it. "Yes," he
answered, while hoping that it would not stir up a new crsis.
"That's what I thought you said. Brother, you aren't ill."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 14 -
The word "brother" he considered first-the woman was reminding him that they had been
joined in the water ritual. He asked the help of his nestlings that he might measure up to whatever
this new brotheT wanted. "I am not ill," he agreed.
"Though I'm darned if I know how to cope with whatever is wrong with you. But I won't
peel down. And I've got to get out of here." It straightened up and turned again toward the side
door-then stopped and looked back with a quizzical smile. "You might ask me again, real prettily,
under other circumstances. I'm curious to see what I might do."
The woman was gone. Smith relaxed into the water bed and let the room fade away from
him. He felt sober triumph that he had somehow comforted himself so that it was not necessary for
them to die . . . but there was much new to grok. The woman's last speech had contained many
symbols new to him and those which were not new had been arranged in fashions not easily
understood. Out he was happy that the emotional flavor of them had been suitable for
communication between water brothers-although touched with something else both disturbing and
terrifyingly pleasant. He thought about his new brother, the woman creature, and felt odd tingles
run through him. The feeling reminded him of the first time he had been allowed to be present at a
discorporatiOn and he felt happy without knowing why.
He wished that his brother Doctor Mahmoud were here. There was so much to grok, so little
to grok from.
Jill Boardman spent the rest of her watch in a mild daze. She managed to avoid any
mistakes in medication and she answered from reflex the usual verbal overtures made to her. But
the face of the Man from Mars stayed in her mind and she mulled over the crazy things he had said.
No, not "crazy," she corrected-she had done her Stint ~fl psychiatric wards and she felt certain that
his remarks had not been psychotic.
She decided that "innocent" was the proper term-then she decided that the word was not
adequate. His expression was innocent, but his eyes were not. What sort of creature had a face like
that?
She had once worked in a Catholic hospital; she suddenly saw the face of the Man from
Mars surrounded by the head dress of a nursing Sister, a nun. The idea disturbed her, for there was
nothing female about Smith's face.
She was changing into Street clothes when another nurse stuck her head into the locker
room. "Phone, Jill. For you." Jill accepted the call, sound without vision, while she continued to
dress.
"Is this Florence Nightingale?" a baritone voice asked.
"Speaking. That you, Ben?"
"The stalwart upholder of the freedom of the press in person. Little one, are you busy?"
"What do you have in mind?"
"I have in mind taking you out, buying you a bloody steak, plying you with liquor, and
asking you a question."
"The answer is still 'No.'
"Not that question. Another one."
"Oh, do you know another one? If so, tell me."
"Later. I want you softened up by food and liquor first."
"Real steak? Not syntho?"
"Guaranteed. When you stick a fork into it, it will turn imploring eyes on you."
"You must be on an expense account, Ben."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 15 -
"That's irrelevant and ignoble. How about it?"
"You've talked me into it."
"The roof of the medical center. Ten minutes."
She put the street suit she had changed into back into her locker and put on a dinner dress
kept there for emergencies. It was a demure little number, barely translucent and with bustle and
bust pads so subdued that they merely re-created the effect she would have produced had she been
wearing nothing. The dress had cost her a month's pay and did not look it, its subtle power being
concealed like knock-out drops in a drink. Jill looked at herself with satisfaction and took the
bounce tube up to the roof.
There she pulled her cape around her against the wind and was looking for Ben Caxton
when the roof orderly touched her arm. "There is a car over there paging you, Miss Boardman-that
Talbot saloon."
"Thanks, Jack." She saw the taxi spotted for take-off, with its door open. She went to it,
climbed in, and was about to hand Ben a backhanded compliment on gallantry when she saw that
he was not inside. The taxi was on automatic; its door closed and it took to the air, swung Out of
the circle, and sliced across the Potomac. Jill sat back and waited.
The taxi stopped on a public landing flat over Alexandria and Ben Caxton got in; it took off
again. Jill looked him over grimly. "My, aren't we getting important! Since when has your time
become so valuable that you send a robot to pick up your women?"
He reached over, patted her knee, and said gently, "Reasons, little one, reasons-I can't afford
to be seen picking you up-"
"~Velll"
"-and you can't afford to be seen being picked up by me. So simmer down. I apologize. I
bow in the dust. I kiss your little foot. But it was necessary."
"Hmm ... which one of us has leprosy?"
"Both of us, in different ways. Jill, I'm a newspaperman."
"I was begimiing to think you were something else."
"And you are a nurse at the hospital where they are holding the Man from Mars." He spread
his hands and shrugged.
"Keep talking. Does that make me unfit to meet your mother?"
"Do you need a map, Jill? There are more than a thousand reporters in this area, not
counting press agents, ax grinders, winchells, lippmanns, and the stampede that headed this way
when the Champion landed. Every one of them has been trying to interview the Man from Mars,
including me. So far as I know, none has succeeded. Do you think it would be Smart for us to be
seen leaving the hospital together?"
"Umm, maybe not. But I don't really see that it matters. I'm not the Man from Mars."
He looked her over. "You certainly aren't. But maybe you are going to help me see himwhich
is why I didn't want to be seen picking you
"Huh? Ben, you've been out in the sun without your hat. They've got a marine guard around
him." She thought about the fact that she herself had not found the guard too hard to circumvent,
decided not to mention it.
"So they have. So we talk it over."
"I don't see what there is to talk about."
"Later. I didn't intend to let the subject come up until I had softened you with animal
proteins and ethanol. Let's eat first."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 16 -
"Now you sound rational. Where? Would your expense account run to the New Mayflower?
You are on an expense account, aren't you?"
Caxton frowned. "Jill, if we eat in a restaurant, I wouldn't want to risk one closer than
Louisville. It would take this hack more than two hours to get us that far. How about dinner in my
apartment?"
"'-Said the Spider to the Fly.' Ben, I remember the last time. I'm too tired to wrestle."
"Nobody asked you to. Strictly business. King's X, cross my heart and hope to die."
"I don't know as I like that much better. If I'm safe alone with you, I must be slipping. Well,
all right, King's X."
Caxton leaned forward and punched buttons; the taxi, which had been circling under a
"hold" instruction, woke up, looked around, and headed for the apartment hotel where Ben lived.
He then dialed a phone number and said to Jill, "How much time do you want to get liquored up,
sugar foot? I'll tell the kitchen when to have the steaks ready."
Jill considered it. "Ben, your mousetrap has a private kitchen."
"Of sorts. I can grill a steak, if that is what you mean."
"I'll grill the steak. Hand me the phone." She gave orders, stopping to make sure that Ben
liked endive.
The taxi dropped them on the roof and they went down to his flat. It was unstylish and oldfashioned;
its one luxury was a live grass lawn in the living room. Jill stopped in the entrance hail,
slipped off her shoes, then stepped bare-footed into the living room and wiggled her toes among the
cool green blades. She sighed. "My, that feels good. My feet have hurt ever since I entered
training."
"Sit down."
"No, I want my feet to remember this tomorrow, when I'm on duty."
"Suit yourself." He went into his pantry and mixed drinks.
Presently she pattered after him and became domestic. The steak was waiting in the package
lift; with it were pre-baked potatoes ready to be popped into short-wave. She tossed the salad,
handed it to the refrigerator, then set up a combination on the stove to grill the steak and have the
potatoes hot simultaneously, but did not start the cycle. "Ben, doesn't this stove have a remote
control?"
"Of course."
"Well, I can't find it."
He studied the setup on the control panel, then flipped an unmarked switch. "Jill, what
would you do if you had to cook over an open fire?"
"I'd do darn well. I was a Girl Scout and a good one. How about you, smarty?"
He ignored it, picked up a tray and went back to the living room; she followed and sat down
at his feet, spreading her skirt to avoid grass stains. They applied themselves seriously to martinis.
Opposite his chair was a stereovision tank disguised as an aquarium; he switched it on from his
chair, guppies and tetras faded out and gave way to the face of a commentator, the well-known
winchell Augustus Greaves.
"-it can be stated authoritatively," the stereo image was saying, "that the Man from Mars is
being kept constantly under hypnotic drugs to keep him from disclosing these facts. The
administration would find it extremely embarrassing if-"
Canon flipped it off. "Gus old boy," he said pleasantly, "you don't know a durn thing more
about it than I do." He frowned. "Though you might be right about the government keeping him
under drugs."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 17 -
"No, they aren't," Jill said suddenly.
"Eh? How's that, little one?"
"The Man from Mars isn't being kept under hypnotics." Having blurted more than she had
meant to, she added carefully, "He's got a nurse and a doctor all to himself on continuous watch,
but there aren't any orders for sedation."
"Are you sure? You aren't one of his nurses-or are you?"
"No. They're male nurses. Uh ... matter of fact, there's an order to keep women away from
him entirely and a couple of tough marines to make sure of it."
Caxton nodded. "I heard about that. Fact is, you don't know whether they are drugging him
or not. Do you?"
Jill stared into her empty glass. She felt annoyed to have her word doubted but realized she
would have to tell on herself to back up what she had said. "Ben? You wouldn't give me away?
Would you?"
"Give you away? How?"
"Any way at all."
"Hmm ... that covers a lot of ground, but I'll go along."
"All right. Pour me another one first." He did so, Jill went on. "I know they don't have the
Man from Mars hopped up-because I talked with him."
Caxton gave a slow whistle. "I knew it. When I got up this morning I said to myself, 'Go see
Jill. She's the ace up my sleeve.' Honey lamb, have another drink. Have six. Here, take the pitcher."
"Not so fast, thanks."
"Whatever you like. May I rub your poor tired feet? Lady, you are about to be interviewed.
Your public waits with quivering impatience. Now let's begin at the beginning. How-"
"No, Ben! You promised-remember? You quote me just one little quote and I'll lose my
job."
"Mmm ... probably. How about 'from a usually reliable source'?"
"I'd be scared."
"Well? Are you going to tell Uncle Ben? Or are you going to let him die of frustration and
then eat that steak by yourself?"
"Oh, I'll talk-now that I've talked this much. But you can't use it." Ben kept quiet and did not
press his luck; Jill described how she had outflanked the guards.
He interrupted. "Say! Could you do that again?"
"Huh? I suppose so, but I won't. It's risky."
"Well, could you slip me in that way? Of course you could! Look, I'll dress up like an
electrician-greasy coveralls, union badge, tool kit. You just slip me the pass key and-"
"No!"
"Huh? Look, baby girl, be reasonable. I'll bet you four to one that half the hospital staffers
around him are ringers, stuck in there by one news service or another. This is the greatest humaninterest
story since Colombo conned Isabella into hocking her jewels. The only thing that worries
me is that I may find another phony electrician-"
"The only thing that worries me is me," Jill interrupted. "To you it's just a story; to me it's
my career. They'd take away my cap, my pin, and ride me out of town on a rail. I'd be finished as a
nurse."
"Mmm ... there's that."
"There sure is that."
"Lady, you are about to be offered a bribe."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 18 -
"How big a bribe? It'll take quite a chunk to keep me in style the rest of my life in Rio."
"Well ... the story is worth money, of course, but you can't expect me to outbid Associated
Press, or Reuters. How about a hundred?"
"What do you think I am?"
"We settled that, we're dickering over the price. A hundred and fifty?"
"Pour me another drink and look up the phone number of Associated Press for me, that's a
lamb."
"It's Capitol 10-9000. Jill, will you marry me? That's as high as I can
She looked up at him, startled. "What did you say?"
"Will you marry me? Then, when they ride you out of town on a rail, I'll be waiting at the
city line and take you away from your sordid existence. You'll come back here and cool your toes
in my grass-our grass- and forget your ignominy. But you've durn well got to sneak me into that
hospital room first."
"Ben, you almost sound serious. If I phone for a Fair Witness, will you repeat the offer?"
Caxton sighed. "Jill, you're a hard woman. Send for a Witness."
She stood up. "Ben," she said softly, "I won't hold you to it." She rumpled his hair and
kissed him. "But don't ever joke about marriage to a spinster."
"I wasn't joking."
"I wonder. Wipe off the lipstick and I'll tell you everything I know, then we'll consider how
you can use it without getting me ridden on that rail. Fair enough?"
"Fair enough."
She gave him a detailed account. "I'm sure he wasn't drugged. I'm equally sure that he was
rational-although why I'm sure I don't know, for he talked in the oddest fashion and asked the
darnedest questions. But I'm sure. He isn't psychotic."
"It would be odder still if he hadn't talked in an odd fashion."
"Huh?"
"Use your head, Jill. We don't know much about Mars but we do know that Mars is very
unlike Earth and that Martians, whatever they are, certainly are not human. Suppose you were
suddenly popped into a tribe so far back in the jungle that they had never laid eyes on a white
woman. Would you know all the sophisticated small talk that comes from a lifetime in a culture?
Or would your conversation sound odd? That's a very mild analogy; the truth in this case is at least
forty million miles stranger."
Jill nodded. "I figured that out ... and that is why I discounted his odd remarks. I'm not
dumb."
"No, you're real bright, for a female."
"Would you like this martini poured in your thinning hair?"
"I apologize. Women are lots smarter than men; that is proved by our whole cultural setup.
Gimme, I'll fill it."
She accepted the peace offerings and went on, "Ben, that order about not letting him see
women, it's silly. He's no sex fiend."
"No doubt they don't want to hand him too many shocks at once."
"He wasn't shocked. He was just ... interested. It wasn't like having a man look at me at all."
"If you had humored him on that request for a private viewing, you might have had your
hands full. He probably has all the instincts and no inhibitions."
"Huh? I don't think so. I suppose they've told him about male and female; he just wanted to
see how women are different."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 19 -
"'Vive Ia difference!'" Caxton answered enthusiastically.
"Don't be more vulgar than you have to be."
"Me? I wasn't being vulgar, I was being reverent. I was giving thanks to all the gods that I
was born human and not Martian."
"Be serious,"
"I was never more serious."
"Then be quiet. He wouldn't have given me any trouble. He would probably have thanked
me gravely. You didn't see his face-I did."
"What about his face?"
Jill looked puzzled. "I don't know how to express it. Yes, I do!-Ben, have you ever seen an
angel?"
"You, cherub. Otherwise not."
"Well, neither have I-but that is what he looked like. He had old, wise eyes in a completely
placid face, a face of unearthly innocence." She shivered.
"'Unearthly' is surely the right word," Ben answered slowly. "I'd like to see him."
"I wish you had. Ben, why are they making such a thing out of keeping him shut up? He
wouldn't hurt a fly. I'm sure of it."
Caxton fitted his fingertips together. "Well, in the first place they want to protect him. He
grew up in Mars gravity; he's probably weak as a cat."
"Yes, of course. You could see it, just looking at him. But muscular weakness isn't
dangerous; myasthenia gravis is much worse and we manage all right with such cases."
"They would want to keep him from catching things, too. He's like those experimental
animals at Notre Dame; he's never been exposed."
"Sure, sure-no antibodies. But from what I hear around the mess hail, Doctor Nelson-the
surgeon in the Champion, I mean-Doctor Nelson took care of that on the trip bac
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 20 -
"Honey, your pal appears to be the first interplanetary bastard of record. I mean 'love
child.'"
"The hell you say!"
"Please be more ladylike in your speech. Do you remember anything about the crew of the
Envoy? Never mind, I'll hit the high points. Eight people, four married couples. Two couples were
Captain and Mrs. Brant, Doctor and Mrs. Smith. Your friend with the face of an angel appears to be
the son of Mrs. Smith by Captain Brant."
"How do they know? And, anyhow, who cares?" Jill sat up and said indignantly, "It's a
pretty snivelin' thing to dig up a scandal after all this time. They're all dead-let 'em alone, I say!"
"As to how they know, you can figure that out. Blood typing, Rh factor, hair and eye color,
all those genetic things-you probably know more about them than I do. Anyhow it is a
mathematical certainty that Mary Jane Lyle Smith was his mother and Captain Michael Brant was
his father. All the factors are matters of record for the entire crew of the Envoy; there probably
never were eight people more thoroughly measured and typed. Also it gives Valentine Michael
Smith a wonderfully fine heredity; his father had an I.Q. of 163, his mother 170, and both were tops
in their fields.
"As to who cares," Ben went on, "a lot of people care very much- and a lot more will care,
once this picture shapes up. Ever heard of the Lyle Drive?"
"Of course. That's what the Champion used."
"And every other space ship, these days. Who invented it?"
"I don't-Wait a minute! You mean she-"
"Hand the little lady a cigar! Dr. Mary Jane Lyle Smith. She knew she had something
important, even though development work remained to be done on it. So before she left on the
expedition, she applied for a dozenodd basic patents and placed it all in a corporate trust-not a nonprofit
corporation, mind you-then assigned control and interim income to the Science Foundation.
So eventually the government got control of it-but your friend with the face of an angel owns it. No
possible doubt. It's worth millions, maybe hundreds of millions; I couldn't guess."
They brought in dinner. Caston used ceiling tables to protect his lawn; he lowered one down
in front of his chair and another to Japanese height so that Jill could sit on the grass. "Tender?" he
asked.
"Ongerful!" she answered with her mouth full.
"Thanks. Remember, I cooked it."
"Ben," she said after swallowing, "how about Smith being a-I mean, being illegitimate? Can
he inherit?"
"He's not illegitimate. Doctor Mary Jane was at Berkeley, and California laws deny the
concept of bastardy. Same for Captain Brant, as New Zealand also has civilized laws on the
subject. While under the laws of the home State of Doctor Ward Smith, Mary Jane's husband, a
child born in wedlock is legitimate, come hell or high water. We have here. Jill, a man who is the
Simon-pure legitimate child of three different parents.
"Huh? Now wait a minute, Ben; he can't be it both ways. One or the other but not both. I'm
not a lawyer but-"
"You sure ain't. Such legal fictions bother a lawyer not at all. Smith is legitimate different
ways in different jurisdictions, all kosher and all breaking his way-even though he is probably a
bastard in his physical ancestry. So he inherits. Besides that, while his mother was wealthy, both his
fathers were at least well to do. Brant was a bachelor until just before the expedition; he had
ploughed most of his scandalous salary as a pilot on the Moon run back into Lunar Enterprises,
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 21 -
Limited. You know how that stuff has boomed-they just declared another three-way stock dividend.
Brant had one vice, gambling-but the bloke won regularly and invested that, too. Ward Smith had
family money; he was a medical man and scientist by choice. Smith is heir to both of them."
"Whew!"
"That ain't half, honey. Smith is heir to the entire crew."
"Huh?"
"All eight signed a 'Gentlemen Adventurers' contract, making them all mutually heirs to
each other-all of them and their issue. They did it with great care, using as models similar contracts
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries that had stood up against every effort to break them. Now
these were all high-powered people; among them they had quite a lot. Happened to include
considerable Lunar Enterprises stock, too, besides what Brant held. Smith might turn out to own a
controlling interest, or at least a key bloc in a proxy fight."
Jill thought about the childlike creature who had made such a touching ceremony out of just
a drink of water and felt sorry for him. But Caxton went on: "I wish I could sneak a look at the
Envoy's log. I know they recovered it-but I doubt if they'll ever release it."
"Why not, Ben?"
"Because it's a nasty story. I got Just enough to be sure before my informant sobered up and
clammed up. Dr. Ward Smith delivered his wife of child by Caesarian section-and she died on the
table. He seems to have worn his horns complacently until then. But what he did next shows that he
knew the score; with the same scalpel he cut Captain Brant's throat- then cut his own. Sorry, hon."
Jill shivered. "I'm a nurse. I'm immune to such things."
"You're a liar and I love you for it. I was on police beat for three years, Jill; I never got
hardened to it."
"What happened to the others?"
"I wish I knew. If we don't break the bureaucrats and high brass loose from that log, we'll
never know-and I am enough of a starry-eyed newsboy to think we should know. Secrecy begets
tyranny."
"Ben, he might be better off if they gypped him out of his inheritance. He's very . . . uh,
unworldly."
"The exact word, I'm sure. Nor does he need all that money; the Man from Mars will never
miss a meal. Any of the governments and any of a thousand-odd universities and scientific
institutions would be delighted to have him as a permanent, privileged guest."
"He'd better sign it over and forget it."
"It's not that easy. Jill, you know about the famous case of General Atomics versus Larkin,
et al?"
"Uh, not really. You mean the Larkin Decision. I had to study it in school, same as
everybody. But what's it got to do with Smith?"
"Think back. The Russians sent the first rocket to the Moon, it crashed. The United States
and Canada combine to send another one; it gets back but leaves nobody on the Moon. So when the
United States and the Commonwealth are getting set to send a colonizing one jointly under the
nominal sponsorship of the Federation and Russia is mounting the same deal on their own, General
Atomics steals a march by sending one of their own from an island leased from Ecuador-and their
men are still there, sitting pretty and looking smug when the Federation vessel shows up . . .
followed by the Russian one.
"You know what happened. General Atomics, a Swiss corporation American controlled,
claimed the Moon. The Federation couldn't just brush them off; that would have been too raw and
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 22 -
anyhow the Russians wouldn't have held still. So the High Court ruled that a corporate person, a
mere legal fiction, could not own a planet; therefore the real owners were the flesh-and-blood men
who had maintained the occupation-Larkin and associates. So they recognized them as a sovereign
nation and took them into the Federation-with some melon slicing for those on the inside and fat
concessions to General Atomics and its daughter corporation, Lunar Enterprises. This did not
entirely suit anybody and the Federation High Court was not all powerful in those days-but it was a
compromise everybody could swallow. It resulted in some tight rules for colonizing planets, all
based on the Larkin Decision and intended to avoid bloodshed. Worked, too-it's a matter of history
that World War Three did not result from conflict over space travel and such. So now the Larkin
Decision is solidly a part of our planetary law and applies to Smith."
Jill shook her head. "I don't see the connection. Martinis-"
"Think, Jill. By our laws, Smith is a sovereign nation in himself-and sole owner of the
planet Mars."
V
JILL LOOKED ROUND-EYED. "I've certainly had too many martinis Ben. I would swear that you
said that that patient owns the planet Mars."
"He does. He maintained occupation of it, unassisted, for the required length of time. Smith
is the planet Mars-King, President, sole civic body, what you will. If the skipper of the Champion
had not left colonists behind, Smith's tenure might have failed. But he did, and that continues
occupation even though Smith came to Earth. But Smith doesn't have to split with them; they are
mere immigrants until he grants them Martian citizenship."
"Fantastic!"
"It surely is. Also it's legal. Honey, do you now see why so many people are interested in
who Smith is and where he came from? And why
the administration is so damned anxious to keep him under a rug? What they are doing isn't even
vaguely legal. Smith is also a citizen of the United States and of the Federation, by derivation-dual
citizenship with no conflict. It's illegal to hold a citizen, even a convicted criminal, incommunicado
anywhere in the Federation; that's one of the things we settled in World War Three. But I doubt if
Smith knows his rights. Also, it has been considered an unfriendly act all through history to lock up
a visiting friendly monarch-which is what he is-and not to let him see people, especially the press,
meaning me. You still won't sneak me in as a thumbfingered electrician?"
"Huh? You've got me worse scared than ever. Ben, if they had caught me this morning,
what do you think they would have done to me?"
"Mmm ... nothing rough. Just locked you in a padded cell, with a certificate signed by three
doctors, and allowed you mail on alternate leap years. They aren't mad at you. I'm wondering what
they are going to do to him."
"What can they do?"
"Well, he might just happen to die-from gee-fatigue, say. That would be a fine out for the
administration."
"You mean murder him?"
"Tut, tut! Don't use nasty words. I don't think they will. In the first place he is a mine of
information; even the public has some dim notion of that. He might be worth more than Newton
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 23 -
and Edison and Einstein and six more like them all rolled into one. Or he may not be. I don't think
they would dare touch him until they were sure. In the second place, at the very least, he is a bridge,
an ambassador, a unique interpreter, between the human race and the only other civilized race we
have as yet encountered. That is certainly important but there is no way to guess just how
important. How are you on the classics? Ever read H. G. Wells' The War of the Worlds?"
"A long time ago, in school."
"Consider the idea that the Martians might decide to make war on us-and win. They might,
you know, and we have no way of guessing how big a club they can swing. Our boy Smith might
be the go-between, the peacemaker, who could make the First Interplanetary War unnecessary.
Even if this possibility is remote, the administration can't afford to ignore it until they know. The
discovery of intelligent life on Mars is something that, politically, they haven't figured out yet."
"Then you think he is safe?"
"Probably, for the time being. The Secretary General has to guess and guess right. As you
know, his administration is shaky."
"I don't pay any attention to politics."
"You should. It's only barely less important than your own heartbeat."
"I don't pay any attention to that, either."
"Don't talk when I'm orating. The majority headed by the United States could slip apart
overnight-Pakistan would bolt at a nervous cough. In which case there would be a vote of no
conlidence, a general election, and Mr. Secretary General Douglas would be out and back to being
a cheap lawyer again. The Man from Mars can make or break him. Are you going to sneak me in?"
"I am not. I'm going to enter a nunnery. Is there more coffee?"
"I'll see."
They both stood up. Jill stretched and said, "Oh, my ancient bones! And, Lordy, look at the
time! Never mind the coffee, Ben; I've got a hard day tomorrow, being polite to nasty patients and
standing clear of internes. Run me home, will you? Or send me home, I guess that's safer. Call a
cab, that's a lamb."
"Okay, though the evening is young." He went into his bedroom, caine out carrying an
object about the size and shape of a small cigarette lighter. "Sure you won't sneak me in?"
"Gee, Ben, I want to, but-"
"Never mind. I wouldn't let you. It really is dangerous-and not just to your career. I was just
softening you up for this." He showed her the little object. "Will you put a bug on him?"
"Huh? What is it?"
"The greatest boon to divorce lawyers and spies since the Mickey Finn. A
microminiaturized wire recorder. The wire is spring driven so that it can't be spotted by a snooper
circuit. The insides are transistors and resistors and capacitors and stuff, all packed in plastic-you
could drop it Out of a cab and not hurt it. The power is about as much radioactivity as you would
find in a watch dial, but shielded, The wire is good for twentyfour hours. Then you slide out a spool
and stick in another one-the spring is part of the spool, already wound."
"Will it explode?" she asked nervously.
"You could bake it in a cake."
"But, Ben, you've got me scared to go back into his room now."
"Unnecessary. You can go into the room next door, can't you?"
"I suppose so."
"This thing has donkey's ears. Fasten the concave side flat against a wall-surgical tape will
do nicely-and it picks up every word spoken in the room beyond. Is there a closet or something?"
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 24 -
She thought about it. "I'm bound to be noticed if I duck in and out of that adjoining room
too much; it's really part of the suite he's in. Or they may start using it. Look, Ben, his room has a
third wall in common with a room on another corridor. Will that do?"
"Perfect. Then you'll do it?"
"Umm ... give it to me. I'll think it over and see how the land lies."
Caxton stopped to polish it with his handkerchief. "Put on your gloves."
"Why?"
"Possession of it is slightly illegal, good for a short vacation behind bars. Always use gloves
on it and the spare spools-and don't get caught with it."
"You think of the nicest thingsl"
"Want to back out?"
Jill let out a long breath. "No. I've always wanted a life of crime. Will you teach me
gangster lingo? I want to be a credit to you."
"Good girl!" A light blinked over the door, he glanced up. "That must be your cab. I rang
for it when I went to get this."
"Oh. Find my shoes, will you? No, don't come up to the roof. The less I'm seen with you
from here on the better."
"As you wish."
As he straightened up from putting her shoes on, she took his head in both hands and kissed
him. "Dear Ben! No good can come of this and I hadn't realized you were a criminal type-but you're
a good cook, as long as I set up the combination . . . and I just might marry you if I can trap you
into proposing again."
"The offer remains open."
"Do gangsters marry their molls? Or is it 'frails'? We'll see" She left hurriedly.
Jill Boardman placed the bug without difficulty. The patient in the adjacent room in the next
corridor was bedfast; Jill often Stopped to gossip. She stuck it against the wall over a closet shelf
while chattering about how the maids just never dusted high in the closets.
Removing the spool the next day and inserting a fresh one was just as easy; the patient was
asleep. She woke while Jill was still perched on a chair and seemed surprised; Jill diverted her with
a spicy and imaginary ward rumor.
Jill sent the exposed wire by mail, using the hospital's post office as the impersonal
blindness of the postal System seemed safer than a cloak & dagger ruse. But her attempt to insert a
third fresh spool she muffed. She had waited for a time when the patient was asleep but had just
mounted the chair when the patient woke up. "Oh! Hello, Miss Boardman."
Jill froze with one hand on the wire recorder. "Hello, Mrs. Fritschlie," she managed to
answer. "Have a nice nap?"
"Fair," the woman answered peevishly. "My back aches."
"I'll rub it."
"Doesn't help much. Why are you always fiddling around in my closet? Is something
wrong?"
Jill tried to reswallow her stomach. The woman wasn't really suspicious, she told herself.
"Mice," she said vaguely.
"'Mice?' Oh, I can't abide mice! I'll have to have another room, right away!"
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 25 -
Jill tore the little instrument off the closet wall and stuffed it into her pocket, jumped down
from the chair and spoke to the patient. "Now, now, Mrs. Fritschlie-I was just looking to see if
there were any mouse holes in that closet. There aren't."
"You're sure?"
"Quite sure. Now let's rub the back, shall we? Easy over."
Jill decided she could not plant the bug in that room again and concluded that she would
risk attempting to place it in the empty room which was part of K-12, the Suite of the Man from
Mars. But it was almost time for her relief before she was free again. She got the pass key.
Only to find that she did not need it; the door was unlocked and held two more marines; the
guard had been doubled. One of them glanced up as she opened the door. "Looking for someone?"
"No. Don't sit on the bed, boys," she said crisply. "If you need more chairs, we'll send for
them." She kept her eye on the guard while he got reluctantly up; then she left, trying to conceal her
trembling.
The bug was still burning a hole in her pocket when she went off duty; she decided to return
it to Caxton at once. She changed clothes, shifted it to her bag, and went to the roof. Once in the air
and headed toward Ben's apartment she began to breathe easier. She phoned him in flight.
"Caxton speaking."
"Jill, Ben. I want to see you. Are you alone?"
He answered slowly, "I don't think it's smart, kid. Not now."
"Ben, I've got to see you. I'm on my way over."
"Well, okay, if that's how it's got to be."
"Such enthusiasm!"
"Now look, hon, it isn't that I-"
"'Bye!" She switched off calmed down and decided not to take it out on poor Ben-fact was
they both were playing out of their league. At least she was-she should have stuck to nursing and
left politics alone.
She felt better when she saw Ben and better yet when she kissed him and snuggled into his
arms. Ben was such a dear-maybe she really should marry him. But when she tried to speak he put
a hand over her mouth, then whispered close against her ear, "Don't talk. No names and nothing but
trivialities. I may be wired by now."
She nodded and he led her into the living room. Without speaking she got out the wire
recorder and handed it to him. His eyebrows went up when he saw that she was returning not just a
spool but the whole works but he made no comment. Instead he handed her a copy of the afternoon
Post.
"Seen the paper?" he said in a natural voice. "You might like to glance at it while I wash
up."
"Thanks." As she took it he pointed to a column; he then left, taking with him the recorder.
Jill saw that the column was Ben's own syndicated outlet.
THE CROW'S NEST
by Ben Caxton
Everyone knows that jails and hospitals have one thing in common: they both can be very hard to
get out of. In some ways a prisoner is less cut off than a patient; a prisoner can send for his lawyer,
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 26 -
can demand a Fair Witness, he can invoke habeas corpus and require the jailor to show cause in
Open court.
But it takes only a simple NO VISITORS sign, ordered by one of the medicine men of our
peculiar tribe, to consign a hospital patient to oblivion more thoroughly than ever was the Man in
the Iron Mask.
To be sure, the patient's next of kin cannot be kept out by this device
-but the Man from Mars seems to have no next of kin. The crew of the ill-fated Envoy had few ties
on Earth; if the Man in the Iron Mask- pardon me I mean the "Man from Mars"-has any relative
who is guarding his interests, a few thousand inquisitive reporters (such as your present scrivener)
have been unable to verify it.
Who speaks for the Man from Mars? Who ordered an armed guard placed around him?
What is his dread disease that no one may catch a glimpse of him, nor ask him a question? I address
you, Mr. Secretary General; the explanation about "physical weakness" and "gee-fatigue" won't
wash; if that were the answer, a ninety-pound nurse would do as well as an armed guard.
Could this disease be financial in nature? Or (let's say it softly) is it political?
There was more, all in the same vein; Jill could see that Ben was deliberately baiting the
administration, trying to force them to bring Smith out into the open. What that would accomplish
she did not know, her own horizon not encompassing high politics and high finance. She felt, rather
than knew, that Caxton was taking serious risk in challenging the established authorities, but she
had no notion of the size of the danger, nor of what form it might take.
She thumbed through the rest of the paper. It was well loaded with follow-up stories on the
return of the Champion. with pictures of Secretary General Douglas pinning medals on the crew,
interviews with Captain van Tromp and other members of his brave company, pictures of Martians
and Martian cities. There was very little about Smith, merely a medical bulletin that he was
improving slowly but satisfactorily from the effects of his trip.
Ben came out and dropped some sheets of onion skin in her lap. "Here's another newspaper
you might like to see," he remarked and left agan.
Jill soon saw that the other "newspaper" was a transcription of what her first wire had
picked up. As typed out, it was marked "First Voice," "Second Voice," and so on, but Ben had gone
back and written in names wherever he had been able to make attributions later. He had written
across the top: "All voices, identified or not, are masculine."
Most of the items were of no interest. They simply showed that Smith had been fed, or
washed, or massaged, and that each morning and afternoon he had been required to get up and
exercise under the supervision of a voice identified as "Doctor Nelson" and a second voice marked
"second doctor." Jill decided that this must be Dr. Thaddeus.
But one longish passage had nothing to do with the physical care of the patient. Jill read it
and reread it:
Doctor Nelson: How are you feeling, boy? Are you strong enough to talk for a while?
Smith: Yes.
Doctor Nelson: A man wants to talk to you.
Smith: (pause) Who? (Caxton had written in: All of Smith's speeches are preceded by long
pauses, some longer than others.)
Nelson: This man is our great (untranscribable guttural word-Martian?). He is our oldest
Old One. Will you talk with him?
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 27 -
Smith: (very long pause) I am great happy. The Old One will talk and I will listen and grow.
Nelson: No, no! He wants to ask you questions.
Smith: I cannot teach an Old One.
Nelson: The Old One wishes it. Will you let him ask you questions?
Smith: Yes.
(Background noises, short delay.)
Nelson: This way, sir. Uh, I have Doctor Mahmoud standing by, ready to translate for you.
Jill read "New Voice." Caxton had scratched this out and had written in: "Secretary General
Douglasilt"
Secretary General: I won't need him. You say Smith understands English.
Nelson: Well, yes and no, Your Excellency. He knows quite a number of words, but, as
Mahmoud says, he doesn't have any cultural context to hang the words on. It can be rather
confusing.
Secretary General: Oh, we'll get along all right, I'm sure. When I was a youngster I
hitchhiked all through Brazil, without knowing a word of Portuguese when I started. Now, if you
will just introduce us-then leave us alone.
Nelson: Sir? I think I had better stay with my patient.
Secretary General: Really, Doctor? I'm afraid I must insist. Sorry.
Nelson: And I am afraid that I must insist. Sorry, sir. Medical ethics- Secretary General:
(interrupting) As a lawyer, I know a little something of medical jurisprudence-so don't give me that
"medical ethics" mumbo-jumbo, really. Did this patient select you?
Nelson: Not exactly, but- Secretary General: Just as I thought. Has he had any opportunity to
make a choice of physicians? I doubt it. His present status is that of ward of the state. I am acting as
his next of kin, defacto-and, you will find, de jure as well. I wish to interview him alone.
Nelson: (long pause, then very stiffly) If you put it that way, Your Excellency, I withdraw
from the case.
Secretary General: Don't take it that way, Doctor; I didn't mean to get your back hair up. I'm
not questioning your treatment. But you wouldn't try to keep a mother from seeing her son alone,
now would you? Are you afraid that I might hurt him?
Nelson: No, but- Secretary General: Then what is your objection? Come now, introduce us
and let's get on with it. This fussing may be upsetting your patient.
Nelson: Your Excellency, I will introduce you. Then you must select another doctor for
your . . . ward.
Secretary General: I'm sorry, Doctor, I really am. I can't take that as final-we'll discuss it
later. Now, if you please?
Nelson: Step over here, sir. Son, this is the man who wants to see you. Our great Old One.
Smith: (untranscribable)
Secretary General: What did he say?
Nelson: Sort of a respectful greeting. Mahmoud says it translates: "I am only an egg."
More or less that, anyway. He used to use it on me. It's friendly. Son, talk man-talk.
Smith: Yes.
Nelson: And you had better use simple one-syllable words, if I may offer a last
advice.
Secretary General: Oh, I will.
Nelson: Good-by, Your Excellency. Good-by, son.
Secretary General: Thanks, Doctor. See you later.
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 28 -
Secretary General: (continued) How do you feel?
Smith: Feel fine.
Secretary General: Good. Anything you want, just ask for it. We want you to be happy.
Now I have something I want you to do for me. Can you write?
Smith: 'Write?' What is 'write?'
Secretary General: Well, your thumb print will do. I want to read a paper to you. This paper
has a lot of lawyer talk, but stated simply it says that you agree that in leaving Mars you have
abandoned-I mean, given up-any claims that you may have there. Understand me? You assign them
in trust to the government.
Smith: (no answer)
Secretary General: Well, let's put it this way. You don't own Mars, do you?
Smith: (longish pause) I do not understand.
Secretary General: Mmm . . . let's try it this way. You want to stay here, don't you?
Smith: I do not know. I was sent by the Old Ones. (Long untranscribable speech, sounds
like a bullfrog fighting a cat.)
Secretary General: Damn it, they should have taught him more English by now. See here,
son, you don't have to worry about these things. Just let me have your thumb print here at the
bottom of this page. Let me have your right hand. No, don't twist around that wa
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 29 -
Special Service squads are thorough. But this cab-" He patted its seat cushions. "They can't
gimmick thousands of cabs. One picked at random should be safe."
Jill shivered. "Ben, you don't really think they would..." She let it trail off.
"Don't I, now! You saw my column. I filed that copy nine hours ago. Do you think the
administration will let me kick it in the stomach without doing something about it?"
"But you have always opposed this administration."
"That's okay. The duty of His Majesty's Loyal Opposition is to oppose. They expect that.
But this is different; I have practically accused them of holding a political prisoner . . . one the
public is very much interested in. Jill, a government is a living organism. Like every living thing its
prime characteristic is a blind, unreasoned instinct to survive. You hit it, it will fight back. This
time I've really hit it." He gave her a sidelong look. "I shouldn't have involved you in this."
"Me? I'm not afraid. At least not since I turned that gadget back over to you."
"You're associated with me. If things get rough, that could be enough."
Jill shut up. She had never in her life experienced the giant ruthlessness of giant power.
Outside of her knowledge of nursing and of the joyous guerilla warfare between the sexes, Jill was
almost as innocent as the Man from Mars. The notion that she, Jill Ooardman, who had never
experienced anything worse than a spanking as a child and an occasional harsh word as an adult,
could be in physical danger was almost impossible for her to believe. As a nurse, she had seen the
consequences of ruthlessness, violence, brutality-but it could not happen to her.
Their cab was circling for a landing in Hagerstown before she broke the moody silence.
"Ben? Suppose this patient does die. What happens?"
"Huh?" He frowned. "That's a good question, a very good question. I'm glad you asked it; it
shows you are taking an interest in the work. Now if there are no other questions, the class is
dismissed."
"Don't try to be funny."
"Hmm ... Jill, I've been awake nights when I should have been dreaming about you, trying
to answer that one. It's a two-part question, political and financial-and here are the best answers I
have now: If Smith dies, his odd legal claim to the planet Mars vanishes. Probably the pioneer
group the Champion left behind on Mars starts a new claim-and almost certainly the administration
worked out a deal with them before they left Earth. The Champion is a Federation ship but it is
more than possible that the deal, if there was one, leaves all the strings in the hands of that
redoubtable defender of human rights, Mr. Secretary General Douglas. Such a deal could keep him
in power for a long time. On the other hand, it might mean nothing at all."
"Huh? Why?"
"The Larkin Decision might not apply. Luna was uninhabited, but
Mars is inhabited-by Martians. At the moment, Martians are a legal zero. But the High Court might
take a look at the political situation, stare at its collective navel, and decide that human occupancy
meant nothing on a planet already inhabited by non-human natives. Then rights on Mars, if any,
would have to be secured from the Martians themselves."
"But, Ben, that would logically be the case anyhow. This notion of a single man owning a
planet ...it' s fantastic!"
"Don't use that word to a lawyer; he won't understand you. Straining at gnats and
swallowing camels is a required course in all law schools. Besides, there is a case in point. In the
fifteenth century the Pope deeded the entire western hemisphere to Spain and Portugal and nobody
paid the slightest attention to the fact that the real estate was already occupied by several million
Indians with their own laws, customs, and notions of property rights. His grant deed was pretty
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 30 -
effective, too. Take a look at a western hemisphere map sometime and notice where Spanish is
spoken and where Portuguese is spoken-and see how much land the Indians have left."
"Yes, but- Ben, this isn't the fifteenth century."
"It is to a lawyer. They still cite Blackwell, Code Napoleon, or even the laws of Justinian.
Mark it down, Jill; if the High Court rules that the Larkin Decision applies, Smith is in a position to
grant or withhold concessions on Mars which may be worth millions, or more likely billions. If he
assigns his claim to the present administration, then Secretary Douglas is the man who will hand
out the plums. Which is just what Douglas is trying to rig. You saw that bug transcript."
"Ben, why should anybody want that sort of power?"
"Why does a moth fly toward a light? The drive for power is even less logical than the sex
urge . . . and stronger. But I said this was a two-part question. Smith's financial holdings are almost
as important as his special position as nominal king-emperor of Mars. Possibly more important, for
a High Court decision could knock out his squatter's rights on Mars but I doubt if anything could
shake his ownership of the Lyle Drive and a major chunk of Lunar Enterprises; the eight wills are a
matter of public record- and in the three most important cases he inherits with or without a will.
What happens if he dies? I don't know. A thousand alleged cousins would pop up, of course, but the
Science Foundation has fought off a lot of such money-hungry vermin in the past twenty years. It
seems possible that, if Smith dies without making a will, his enormous fortune will revert to the
state."
"'The state?' Do you mean the Federation or the United States?"
"Another very good question to which I do not know the answer. His natural parents come
from two different member countries of the Federation and he was born outside all of them . . . and
it is going to make a crucial difference to some people who votes those blocks of stock and who
licenses those patents. It won't be Smith; he won't know a stock proxy from a traffic ticket. It is
likely to be whoever can grab him and hang onto him. In the meantime I doubt if Lloyd's would
write a policy on his life; he strikes me as a very poor risk."
"The poor baby! The poor, poor infant!"
VI
THE RESTAURANT IN HAGERSTOWN had "atmosphere" as well as good food, which meant
that it had tables scattered not only over a lawn leading down to the edge of a little lake but also
had tables in the boughs of three enormous old trees. Over all was a force field roof which kept the
outdoors dining area perpetually summer even in rain and snow.
Jill wanted to eat up in the trees, but Ben ignored her and bribed the maître d'hôtel to set up
a table near the water in a spot of his choice, then ordered a portable stereo tank placed by their
table.
Jill was miffed. "Ben, why bother to come here and pay these prices if we can't eat in the
trees and have to endure that horrible jitterbox?"
"Patience, little one. The tables up in the trees all have microphone circuits; they have to
have them for service. This table is not gimmicked- I hope-as I saw the waiter take it from a stack
of unused ones. As for the tank, not only is it unAmerican and probably subversive to eat without
watching stereo but also the racket from it would interfere even with a directional mike aimed at us
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 31 -
from a distance . . . assuming that Mr. Douglas's investigators are beginning to take an interest in
us, which I misdoubt they are."
"Do you really think they might be shadowing us, Ben?" Jill shivered. "I don't think I'm cut
out for a life of crime."
"Pish and likewise tush! When I was working on the General Synthetics bribery scandals I
never slept twice in the same place and ate nothing but packaged food I had bought myself. After a
while you get to like it- stimulates the metabolism."
"My metabolism doesn't need it, thank you. All I require is one elderly, wealthy private
patient."
"Not going to marry me, Jill?"
"After my future husband kicks off, yes. Or maybe I'll be so rich I can afford to keep you as
a pet."
"Best offer I've had in months. How about starting tonight?"
"After he kicks off."
During their cocktails the musical show plus lavish commercials which had been banging
their eardrums from the stereo tank suddenly stopped. An announcer's head and shoulders filled the
tank; he smiled sincerely and said, "NWNW, New World Networks and its sponsor of the hour,
Wise Girl Maithusian Lozenges, is honored and privileged to surrender the next few minutes to a
special, history-making broadcast by the Federation Government. Remember, friends, every wise
girl uses Wise Girls. Easy to carry, pleasant to take, guaranteed no-fail, and approved for sale
without prescription under Public Law 1312, Why take a chance on old-fashioned, unesthetic,
harmful, unsure methods? Why risk losing his love and respect? Remember The lovely, lupine
announcer glanced aside and hurried through the rest of his commercial: "I give you the Wise Girl,
who in turn brings you the Secretary General-and the Man from Mars!"
The 3-D picture dissolved into that of a young woman, so sensuous, so unbelievably
mammalian, so seductive, as to make every male who saw her unsatisfied with local talent. She
stretched and wiggled and said in a bedroom voice, "I always use Wise Girl."
The picture dissolved and a full orchestra played the opening bars of Hail to Sovereign
Peace. Ben said, "Do you use Wise Girl?"
"None o' your business!" She looked ruffled and added, "It's a quack nostrum. Anyhow,
what makes you think I need it?"
Caxton did not answer; the tank had filled with the fatherly features of Mr. Secretary
General Douglas. "Friends," he began, "fellow citizens of the Federation, I have tonight a unique
honor and privilege. Since the triumphant return of our trail-blazing ship Champion-" He continued
in a few thousand well-chosen words to congratulate the citizens of Earth on their successful
contact with another planet, another civilized race. He managed to imply that the exploit of the
Champion was the personal accomplishment of every citizen of the Federation, that any one of
them could have led the expedition had he not been busy with other serious work-and that he,
Secretary Douglas, had been chosen by them as their humble instrument to work their will. The
flattering notions were never stated baldly, but implied; the underlying assumption being that the
common man was the equal of anyone and better than most-and that good old Joe Douglas
embodied the common man. Even his mussed cravat and cowlicked hair had a "just folks" quality.
Bert Caxton wondered who had written the speech. Jim Sanforth, probably-Jim had the
most subtle touch of any member of Douglas' staff in selecting the proper loaded adjective to tickle
and soothe an audience; he had written advertising commercials before he went into politics and
had absolutely no compunctions. Yes, that bit about "the hand that rocks the cradle" was clearly
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 32 -
Jim's work-Jim was the sort of jerk who would entice a young girl with candy and consider it a
smart operation.
"Turn it off!" Jill said urgently.
"Huh? Shut up, pretty foots. I've got to hear this."
"-and so, friends, I have the honor to bring you now our fellow citizen Valentine Michael
Smith, the Man from Mars! Mike, we all know you are tired and have not been well-but will you
say a few words to your friends? They all want to see you."
The stereo scene in the tank dissolved to a semi-close-up of a man in a wheel chair.
Hovering over him like a favorite uncle was Douglas and on the other side of the chair was a nurse,
stiff, starched, and photogenic.
Jill gasped. Ben whispered fiercely, "Keep quiet! I don't want to miss a word of this."
The interview was not long. The smooth babyface of the man in the chair broke into a shy
smile; he looked at the cameras and said, "Hello, folks. Excuse me for sitting down. I'm still weak."
He seemed to speak with difficulty and once the nurse interrupted to take his pulse.
In answer to questions from Douglas he paid compliments to Captain van Tromp and the
crew of the Champion, thanked everyone for his rescue, and said that everyone on Mars was
terribly excited over contact with Earth and that he hoped to help in welding strong and friendly
relations between the two planets. The nurse interrupted again, but Douglas said gently. "Mike, do
you feel strong enough for just one more question?"
"Sure, Mr. Douglas-if I can answer it."
"Mike? What do you think of the girls here on Earth?"
"Gee!"
The baby face looked awestruck and ecstatic and turned pink. The scene dissolved again to
the head and shoulders of the Secretary General. "Mike asked me to tell you," he went on in
fatherly tones, "that he will be back to see you as soon as he can. He has to build up his muscles,
you know. The gravity of Earth is as rough on him as the gravity of Jupiter would be to us. Possibly
next week, if the doctors say he is strong enough." The scene shifted back to the exponents of Wise
Girl lozenges and a quick one-act playlet made clear that a girl who did not use them was not only
out of her mind but undoubtedly a syntho in the hay as well; men would cross the street to avoid
her. Ben switched to another channel, then turned to Jill and said moodily, "Well, I can tear up
tomorrow's column and look around for a new subject to plug. They not only made my today's
squawk look silly but it appears that Douglas has him safely under his thumb."
"Ben!"
"Huh?"
"That's not the Man from Mars!"
"What? Baby, are you sure?"
"Sure I'm sure! Oh, it looked like him, it looked a great deal like him. Even the voice was
similar. But it was not the patient I saw in that guarded room."
Ben tried to shake her conviction. He pointed out that several dozen other persons were
known to have seen Smith-guards, internes, male nurses, the captain and crew members of the
Champion, probably others. Quite a few of that list must have seen this newscast-or at least the
administration would have to assume that some of them would see it and spot the substitution . . . if
there had been a substitution. It did not make sense-too great a risk.
Jill did not offer logical rebuttal; she simply stuck Out her lower lip and insisted that the
person on Stereo was not the patient she had met. Finally she said angrily, "All right, all right, have
it your own way! I can't prove I'm right-so I must be wrong. Men!"
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 33 -
"Now, Jill
"Please take me home."
Ben silently went for a cab. He did not accept one from outside the restaurant even though
he no longer thought that anyone would be taking interest in his movements; he selected one from
the landing flat of a hotel across the way. Jill remained chilly on the flight back. Presently Ben got
out the transcripts of the sounds picked up from Smith's hospital room and reread them. He read
them still again, thought for a while, and said, "Jill?"
"Yes, Mr. Caxton?"
"I'll 'mister' you! Look, Jill, I'm sorry, I apologize. I was wrong."
"And what leads you to this momentous conclusion?"
He slapped the folded papers against his palm. "This. Smith could not possibly have been
showing this behavior yesterday and the day before and then have given that interview tonight. He
would have flipped his controls
gone into one of those trance things."
"I am gratified that you have finally seen the obvious."
"Jill, will you kindly kick me in the face a couple of times, then let up? This is serious. Do
you know what this means?"
"It means they used an actor to fake an interview. I told you that an hour ago."
"Sure. An actor and a good one, carefully typed and coached. But it implies much more than
that. As I see it, there are two possibilities. The first is that Smith is dead and-"
"Dead!" Jill suddenly was back in that curious water-drinking ceremony and felt the
strange, warm, unworldly flavor of Smith's personality, felt it with unbearable sorrow.
"Maybe. In which case this ringer will be allowed to stay 'alwe' for a week or ten days, until
they have time to draw up whatever papers they want him to sign. Then the ringer will 'die' and
they will ship him Out of town, probably with a hypnotic injunction not to talk so strong that he
would choke up with asthma if he tried to spill it-or maybe even a transorbital lobotomy if the boys
are playing for keeps. But if Smith is dead, we can just forget it; we'll never be able to prove the
truth. So let's assume that he is still alive."
"Oh, I do hope so!"
"What is Hecuba to you, or you to Hecuba?" Caxton misquoted. "If he is still alive, it could
be that there is nothing especially sinister about it. After all, a lot of public figures use doubles for
some of their appearances;•. it does not even annoy the public because every time a yokel thinks
that he has spotted a double it makes him feel smart and in the know, So it may be that the
administration has just yielded to public demand and given them that look at the Man from Mars
we have all been yapping for. It could be that in two or three weeks our friend Smith will be in
shape to stand the strain of public appearances, at which time they will trot him Out. But I doubt it
like hell!"
"Why?"
"Use your pretty curly head. The Honorable Joe Douglas has already made one attempt to
squeeze out of Smith what he wants . . . and failed miserably. But Douglas can't afford to fail. So I
think he will bury Smith deeper than ever . . . and that is the last we will ever see of the true Man
from Mars."
"Kill him?" Jill said slowly.
"Why be rough about it? Lock him in a private nursing home and never let him learn
anything. He may already have been removed from Bethesda Center."
"Oh, dear! Ben, what are we going to do?"
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 34 -
Caxton scowled and thought. "I don't have a good plan. They own both the bat and the ball
and are making the rules. But what I am going to do is this~ I'm going to walk into that hospital
with a Fair Witness on one side and a tough lawyer on the other and demand to see Smith. Maybe I
can force them to drag it out into the open."
"I'll be right behind you!"
"Like mischief you will. You stay Out of this. As you pointed Out, it would ruin you
professionally."
"But you need me to identify him."
"Not so. I flatter myself that I can tell a man who was raised by nonhumans from an actor
pretending to be such a man in the course of a very short interview. But if anything goes wrong,
you are my ace in the hole-a person who knows that they are pulling hanky-panky concerning the
Man from Mars and who has access to the inside of Bethesda Center. Honey, if you don't hear from
me, you are on your own."
"Ben, they wouldn't hurt you?"
"I'm fighting Out of my weight, youngster. There is no telling."
"Uh ... oh, Ben, I don't like this. Look, if you do get in to see him, what are you going to
do?"
"I'm going to ask him if he wants to leave the hospital. If he says he does, I'm going to
invite him to come along with me. In the presence of a Fair Witness they won't dare stop him. A
hospital isn't a prison; they don't have any legal right to hold him."
"Uh ... then what? He really does need medical attention, Ben; he's not able to take care of
himself. I know."
Caxton scowled again. "I've been thinking of that. I can't nurse him. You could, of course, if
you had the facilities. We could put him in my flat-"
"-and I could nurse him. We'll do it, Ben!"
"Slow down. I thought of that. Douglas would pull some legal rabbit out of his hat, a
deputation in force would call, and Smith would go right back to pokey. And so would both of us,
maybe." He wrinkled his brow. "But I know one man who could give him shelter and possibly get
away with it."
"Ever heard of Jubal Harshaw?"
"Huh? Who hasn't?"
"That's one of his advantages; everybody knows who he is. It makes him hard to shove
around. Being both a doctor of medicine and a lawyer he is three times as hard to shove around.
But most important he is so rugged an individualist that he would fight the whole Federation
Departtflent of Security with just a potato knife if it suited his fancy-and that makes him eight times
as hard to shove around. But the point is that I got well acquainted with him during the disaffection
trials; he is a friend I can count on in a pinch. If I can get Smith out of Bethesda, I'll take him to
Harshaw's place over in the Poconos-and then just let those jerks try to hide him under a rug again!
Between my column and Harshaw's love for a fight we'll give 'em a bad time."
VII
DESPITE A LATE EVENING Jill was ready to relieve the night floor nurse ten minutes early the
next morning. She intended to obey Ben's order to stay out of his proposed attempt to see the Man
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 35 -
from Mars but she was determined to be close by when it happened . . . just in case. Ben might
need reinforcements.
There were no longer marine guards in the corridor. Trays, medications, and two patients to
be prepared for surgery kept her busy the first two hours; she had only time to check the knob of
the door to suite K- 12. It was locked, as was the door to the adjoining sitting room. The door to the
watch room on its other side was closed. She considered sneaking in again to see Smith through the
connecting sitting room, now that the guards were gone, but decided to postpone it; she was too
busy. Nevertheless she managed to keep a close check on everyone who came Onto her floor.
Ben did not show up and discreet questions asked of her assistant on the switchboard
reassured her that neither Ben nor anyone else had gone in to see the Man from Mars while Jill was
busy elsewhere. It puzzled her; while Ben had not set a time, she had had the impression that he
had intended to storm the citadel as early in the day as possible.
Presently she felt that she just had to snoop a bit. During a lull she knocked at the door of
the Suite's watch room, then stuck her head in and pretended surprise. "Oh! Good morning, Doctor.
I thought Doctor Frame was in here."
The physician at the watch desk was strange to Jill. He turned away from the displayed
physio data, looked at her, then smiled as he looked her up and down. "I haven't seen Dr. Frame,
Nurse. I'm Dr. Brush. Can I help?"
At the typical male reaction Jill relaxed. "Nothing special. To tell the truth I was curious.
How is the Man from Mars?"
She smiled and winked. "It's no secret to the staff, Doctor. Your patient-" She gestured at
the inner door.
"Huh?" He looked startled. "Did they have him in this suite?"
"What? Isn't he here now?"
"Not by six decimal places. Mrs. Rose Bankerson-Dr. Garner's patient. We brought her in
early this morning."
"Really? But what happened to the Man from Mars? Where did they put him?"
"I haven't the faintest. Say, did I realiy just miss seeing Valentine Smith?"
"He was here yesterday. That's all I know."
"And Dr. Frame was on his case? Some people have all the luck. Look what I'm stuck
with." He switched on the Peeping Tom above his desk; Jill saw framed in it, as if she were looking
down, a water bed; floating in it was a tiny old woman. She seemed to be asleep.
"What's her trouble?"
"Mmm ... Nurse, if she didn't have more money than any person ought to have, you might
be tempted to call it senile dementia. As it is, she is in for a rest and a check-up."
Jill made small talk for a few moments more, then pretended to see a call light. She went
back to her desk, dug out the night log-yes, there it was: V M. Smith, K-12-zransfer. Below that
entry was another: Rose ~ Bankerson (Mrs.)-red K-12 (diet kitchen instrd by Dr. Garner-no ordersfir
nt respnbl).
Having noted that the rich old gal was no responsibility of hers, Jill turned her mind back to
Valentine Smith. Something about Mrs. Bankerson's case struck her as odd but she could not put
her finger on it, so she put it Out of her mind and thought about the matter that did interest her.
Why had they moved Smith in the middle of the night? To avoid any possible contact with
outsiders, probably. But where had they taken him? Ordinarily she would simply have called
"Reception" and asked, but Ben's opinions plus the phony broadcast of the night b
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 36 -
her jumpy about showing curiosity; she decided to wait until lunch and see what she could pick up
on the gossip grapevine.
But first Jill went to the floor's public booth and called Ben. His office informed her that
Mr. Caxton had just left town, to be gone a few days. She was startled almost speechless by thisthen
pulled herself together and left word for Ben to call her.
She then called his home. He was not there; she recorded the same message.
Ben Caxton had wasted no time in preparing his attempt to force his way into the presence
of Valentine Michael Smith. He was lucky in being able to retain James Oliver Cavendish as his
Fair Witness. While any Fair Witness would do, the prestige of Cavendish was such that a lawyer
was hardly necessary-the old gentleman had testified many times before the High Court of the
Federation and it was said that the wills locked up in his head represented not billions but trillions.
Cavendish had received his training in total recall from the great Dr. Samuel Renshaw himself and
his professional hypnotic instruction had been undergone as a fellow of the Rhine Foundation. His
fee for a day or fraction thereof was more than Ben made in a week, but Ben expected to charge it
off to the Post syndicate-in any case, the best was none too good for this job.
Caxton picked up the junior Frisby of Biddle, Frisby, Frisby, Biddle, & Reed as that law
firm represented the Post syndicate, then the two younger men called for Witness Cavendish. The
long, spare form of Mr. Cavendish, wrapped chin to ankle in the white cloak of his profession,
reminded Ben of the Statue of Liberty . . . and was almost as conspicuous. Ben had already
explained to Mark Fnsby what he intended to try (and Frisby had already pointed Out to him that he
had no status and no rights) before they called for Cavendish; once in the Fair Witness's presence
they conformed to protocol and did not discuss what he might be expected to see and hear.
The cab dropped them on top of Bethesda Center; they went down to the Director's office.
Ben handed in his card and said that he wanted to see the Director.
An imperious female with a richly cultivated accent asked if he had an appointment. Ben
admitted that he had none.
"Then I am afraid that your chance of seeing Dr. Broemer is very slight. Will you state your
business?"
"Just tell him," Caxton said loudly, so that others waiting would hear, "that Caxton of the
Crow's Nest is here with a lawyer and a Fair Witness to interview Valentine Michael Smith, the
Man from Mars."
She was startled almost out of her professional hauteur. But she recovered and said frostily,
"I shall inform him. Will you be seated, please?"
"Thanks, I'll wait right here."
They waited. Frisby broke out a cigar, Cavendish waited with the calm patience of one who
has seen all manner of good and evil and now counts them both the same, Caxton uttered and tried
to keep from biting his nails. At last the snow queen behind the desk announced, "Mr. Berquist will
see you."
"Berquist? Gil Berquist?"
"I believe his name is Mr. Gilbert Berquist."
Caxton thought about it-Gil Berquist was one of Secretary Douglas's large squad of stooges,
or "executive assistants." He specialized in chaperoning official visitors. "I don't want to see
Berquist; I want the Director."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 37 -
But Berquist was already coming out, hand shoved out before him, greeter's grin plastered
on his face. "Benny Caxton! How are you, chum? Long time and so forth. Still peddling the same
old line of hoke?" He glanced at the Fair Witness, but his expression admitted nothing.
Ben shook hands briefly. "Same old hoke, sure. What are you doing here, Gil?"
"If I ever manage to get Out of public service I'm going to get me a column, too-nothing to
do but phone in a thousand words of rumors each day and spend the rest of the day in debauchery. I
envy you, Ben."
"I said, 'What are you doing here, Gil?' I want to see the Director, then get five minutes with
the Man from Mars. I didn't come here for your high-level brush off."
"Now, Ben, don't take that attitude. I'm here because Dr. Broemer has been driven almost
crazy by the press-so the Secretary General sent me over to take some of the load off his
shoulders."
"Okay. I want to see Smith."
"Ben, old boy, don't you realize that every reporter, special correspondent, feature writer,
commentator, free-lance, and sob sister wants the same thing? You winchells are just one squad in
an army; if we let you all have your way, you would kill off the poor jerk in twenty-four hours.
Polly Peepers was here not twenty minutes ago. She wanted to interview him on love life among
the Martians." Berquist threw up both hands and looked helpless.
"I want to see Smith, Do I see him, or don't I?"
"Ben, let's find a quiet place where we can talk over a long, tall glass. You can ask me
anything you want to."
"I don't want to ask you anything; I want to see Smith. By the way, this is my attorney,
Mark Frisby-Biddle & Frisby." As was customary, Ben did not introduce the Fair Witness; they all
pretended that he was not present.
"I've met Frisby," Berquist acknowledged. "How's your father, Mark? Sinuses still giving
him fits?"
"About the same."
"This foul Washington climate. Well, come along, Ben. You, too,Mark."
"Hold it," said Caxton. "I don't want to interview you, Gil. I want to see Valentine Michael
Smith. I'm here as a member of the press, directly representing the Post syndicate and indirectly
representing over two hundred million readers. Do I see him? If I don't, say so out loud and state
your legal authority for refusing me."
Berquist sighed. "Mark, will you tell this keyhole historian that he can't go busting into a
sick man's bedroom just because he has a syndicated column? Valentine Smith made one public
appearance just last night
-against his physician's advice I might add. The man is entitled to peace and quiet and a chance to
build up his strength and get oriented. That appearance last night was enough, more than enough."
"There are rumors," Caxton said carefully, "that the appearance last night was a fake."
Berquist stopped smiling. "Frisby," he said coldly, "do you want to advise your client on the
law concerning slander?"
"Take it easy, Ben."
"I know the law on slander, Gil. In my business I have to. But whom am I slandering? The
Man from Mars? Or somebody else? Name a name. I repeat," he went on, raising his voice, "that I
have heard that the man interviewed on TV last night was not the Man from Mars. I want to see
him myself and ask him."
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 38 -
The crowded reception hail was very quiet as everyone present bent an ear to the argument.
Berquist glanced quickly at the Fair Witness, then got his expression under control and said
smilingly to Caxton, "Ben, it's just possible that you talked yourself into the interview you wantedas
well as a lawsuit. Wait a moment."
He disappeared into the inner office, came back fairly soon. "I arranged it," he said wearily,
"though God knows why. You don't deserve it, Ben. Come along. Just you-Mark, I'm sorry but we
can't have a crowd of people; after all, Smith is a sick man."
"No," said Caxton.
"Huh?"
"All three of us, or none of us. Take your choice."
"Ben, don't be silly; you're receiving a very special privilege. Tell you what-Mark can come
along and wait outside the door But you certainly don't need him." Berquist glanced toward
Cavendish; the Witness seemed not to hear.
"Maybe not. But I've paid his fee to have him along. My column will state tonight that the
administration refused to permit a Fair Witness to see the Man from Mars."
Berquist shrugged. "Come along, then. Ben, I hope that slander suit really clobbers you."
They took the patients' elevator rather than the bounce tube out of deference to Cavendish's
age, then rode a slide-away for a long distance past laboratories, therapy rooms, solaria, and ward
after ward. They were stopped once by a guard who phoned ahead, then let them through; they
were at last ushered into a physio-data display room used for watching critically ill patients. "This
is Dr. Tanner," Berquist announced. "Doctor, this is Mr. Caxton and Mr. Frisby." He did not, of
course, introduce Cavendish.
Tanner looked worried. "Gentlemen, I am doing this against my better judgment because
the Director insists. I must warn you of one thing. Don't do or say anything that might excite my
patient. He is in an extremely neurotic condition and falls very easily into a state of pathological
withdrawal-a trance, if you choose to call it that."
"Epilepsy?" asked Ben.
"A layman might easily mistake it for that. It is more like catalepsy. But don't quote me;
there is no clinical precedent for this case."
"Are you a specialist, Doctor? Psychiatry, maybe?"
Tanner glanced at Berquist. "Yes," he admitted.
"Where did you do your advanced work?"
Berquist said, "Look, Ben, let's see the patient and get it over with. You can quiz Dr. Tanner
afterwards."
"Okay."
Tanner glanced over his dials and graphs, then flipped a switch and stared into a Peeping
Tom, He left the desk, unlocked a door and led them into an adjoining bedroom, putting a finger to
his lips as he did so. The other four followed him in. Caxton felt as if he were being taken to "view
the remains" and suppressed a nervous need to laugh.
The room was quite gloomy. "We keep it semi-darkened because his eyes are not
accustomed to our light levels," Tanner explained in a hushed voice. He turned to a hydraulic bed
which filled the center of the room. "Mike, I've brought some friends to see you."
Caxton pressed closer, Floating therein, half concealed by the way his body sank into the
plastic skin covering the liquid in the tank and farther concealed by a sheet up to his armpits, was a
young man. He looked back at them but said nothing; his smooth, round face was expressionless.
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 39 -
So far as Ben could tell this was the man who had been on stereo the night before. He had a
sudden sick feeling that little Jill, with the best of intentions, had tossed him a live grenade-a
slander suit that might very well bankrupt him. "You are Valentine Michael Smith?"
"Yet"
"The Man from Mars?"
"Yet"
"You were on stereo last night?"
The man in the tank bed did not answer. Tanner said, "I don't think he knows the word. Let
me try. Mike, you remember what you did with Mr. Douglas last night?"
The face looked petulant. "Bright lights. Hurt."
"Yes, the lights hurt your eyes. Mr. Douglas had you say hello to people."
The patient smiled slightly. "Long ride in chair."
"Okay," agreed Caxton. "I catch on. Mike, are they treating you all right here?"
"Yes."
"You don't have to stay here, you know. Can you walk?"
Tanner said hastily, "Now see here, Mr. Caxton-" Berquist put a hand on his arm and he
shut up.
"I can walk ... a little. Tired."
"I'll see that you have a wheel chair. Mike, if you don't want to stay here, I'll help you get
out of bed and take you anywhere you want to go."
Tanner shook off Berquist's hand and said, "I can't have you interfering with my patient!"
"He's a free man, isn't he?" Caxton persisted. "Or is he a prisoner here?"
Berquist answered, "Of course he is a free man! Keep quiet, Doctor. Let the fool dig his
own grave."
"Thanks, Gil. Thanks all to pieces. So he is free to leave if he wants to. You heard what he
said, Mike. You don't have to stay here. You can go anywhere you like. I'll help you."
The patient glanced fearfully at Tanner. "No! No, no, no!"
"Okay, okay."
Tanner snapped, "Mr. Berquist, this has gone quite far enough! My patient will be upset the
rest of the day."
"All right, Doctor. Ben, let's get the show on the road. You've had enough, surely."
"Ub ... just one more question." Caxton thought hard, trying to think what he could squeeze
out of it. Apparently Jill had been wrong- yet she had not been wrong!-or so it had seemed last
night. But something did not quite fit although he could not tell what it was.
"One more question," Berquist begrudged.
"Thanks. Uh ... Mike, last night Mr. Douglas asked you some questions." The patient
watched him but made no comment. "Let's see, he asked you what you thought of the girls here on
Earth, didn't he?"
The patient's face broke into a big smile. "Gee!"
"Yes. Mike ... when and where did you see these girls?"
The smile vanished. The patient glanced at Tanner, then he stiffened, his eyes rolled up, and
he drew himself into the foetal position, knees drawn up, head bent, and arms folded across his
chest.
Tanner snapped, "Get them out of here!" He moved quickly to the tank bed and felt the
patient's wrist.
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 40 -
Berquist said savagely, "That tears it! Caxton, will you get out? Or shall I call the guards
and have you thrown out?"
"Oh, we're getting out all right," Caxton agreed. All but Tanner left the room and Berquist
closed the door.
"Just one point, Gil," Caxton insisted. "You've got him boxed up in there . . . so just where
did he see those girls?"
"Eh? Don't be silly. He's seen lots of girls. Nurses ... laboratory technicians. You know."
"But I don't know. I understood he had nothing but male nurses and that female visitors had
been rigidly excluded."
"Eh? Don't be any more preposterous than you have to be." Berquist looked annoyed, then
suddenly grinned. "You saw a nurse with him on stereo just last night."
"Oh. So I did." Caxton shut up and let himself be led out.
They did not discuss it further until the three were in the air, headed for Cavendish's home.
Then Frisby remarked, "Ben, I don't suppose the Secretary General will demean himself to sue you,
since you did not print it. Still, if you really do have a source for that rumor you mentioned, we had
better perpetuate the evidence. You don't have much of a leg to stand on, you know."
"Forget it Mark. He won't sue." Ben glowered at the floor of the cab. "How do we know that
was the Man from Mars?"
"Eh? Come off it, Ben."
"How do we know? We saw a man about the right age in a hospital bed. We have Berquist's
word for it-and Berquist got his start in politics issuing denials; his word means nothing. We saw a
total stranger, supposed to be a psychiatrist . . . and when I tried to find out where he had studied
psychiatry I got euchred out. How do we know? Mr. Cavendish, did you see or hear anything that
convinced you that this bloke was the Man from Mars?"
Cavendish answered carefully, "It is not my function to form opinions. I see, I hear-that is
all."
"Sorry."
"By the way, are you through with me in my professional capacity?"
"Huh? Oh, sure. Thanks, Mr. Cavendish."
"Thank you, sir. It was an interesting assignment." The old gentleman took off the cloak
that set him apart from ordinary mortals, folded it carefully and laid it on the seat. He sighed,
relaxed, and his features lost professional detachment, warmed and mellowed. He took out cigars,
offered them to the others; Frisby took one and they shared a light. "I do not smoke," Cavendish
remarked through a thick cloud, "while on duty. It interferes with optimum functioning of the
senses."
"If I had been able to bring along a crew member of the Champion," Caxton persisted, "I
could have tied it down. But I thought surely I could tell."
"I must admit," remarked Cavendish, "that I was a little surprised at one thing you did not
do."
"Huh? What did I miss?"
"Calluses"
"Calluses?"
"Surely. A man's life history can be told from his calluses. I once did a monograph on them,
published in The Witness Quarterly- like Sherlock Holmes' famous monograph on tobacco ash.
This young man from Mars
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 41 -
since he has never worn our sort of shoes and has lived in gravity about one third of ours,
should display foot calluses consonant with his former environment. Even the time he recently
spent in space should have left their traces. Very interesting."
"Damn~ Good Lord, Mr. Cavendish, why didn't you suggest it to me?"
"Sir?" The old man drew himself up and his nostrils dilated. "It would not have been ethical.
I am a Fair Witness, not a participant. My professional association would suspend me for much
less. Surely you know that."
"Sorry. I forgot myself." Caxton frowned. "Let's wheel this buggy around and go back.
We'll take a look at his feet-or I'll bust the place down with Berquist's fat head!"
"I'm afraid you will have to find another Witness ... in view of my indiscretion in discussing
it, even after the fact."
"Uh, yes, there's that." Caxton frowned.
"Better just calm down, Ben," advised Frisby. "You're in deep enough now. Personally, I'm
convinced it was the Man from Mars. Occam's razor, least hypothesis, just plain horse sense."
Caxton dropped them, then set the cab to cruise while he thought. Presently he punched the
combination to take him back to Bethesda Medical Center.
He was less than half way back to the Center when he realized that his trip was useless.
What would happen? He would get as far as Berquist, no farther. He had been allowed in once-with
a lawyer, with a Fair Witness. To demand to be allowed to see the Man from Mars a second time,
all in one morning, was unreasonable and would be refused. Nor, since it was unreasonable, could
he make anything effective out of it in his column.
But he bad not acquired a widely syndicated column through being balked. He intended to
get in.
How? Well, at least he now knew where the putative "Man from Mars" was being kept. Get
in as an electrician? Or as a janitor? Too obvious; he would never get past the guard, not even as far
as "Dr. Tanner."
Was "Tanner" actually a doctor? It seemed unlikely. Medical men, even the worst of them, tended
to shy away from hanky-panky contrary to their professional code. Take that ship's surgeon,
Nelson-he had quit, washed his hands of the case simply because- Wait a minute! Dr. Nelson was
one man who could tell offhand
whether that young fellow was the Man from Mars, without checking calluses, using trick
questions, or anything. Caxton reached for buttons, ordered his cab to ascend to parking level and
hover, and immediately tried to phone Dr. Nelson, relaying through his office for the purpose since
he neither knew where Dr. Nelson was, nor had with him the means to find out. Nor did his
assistant Osbert Kilgallen know where he was, either, but he did have at hand resources to find out;
it was not even necessary to draw on Caxton's large account of uncollected favors in the Enclave, as
the Post syndicate's file on Important Persons placed him at once in the New Mayflower. A few
minutes later Caxton was talking with him.
To no purpose-Dr. Nelson had not seen the broadcast. Yes, he had heard about it; no, he had
no reason to think the broadcast had been faked. Did Dr. Nelson know that an attempt had been
made to coerce Valentine Smith into surrendering his rights to Mars under the Larkin Decision?
No, he did not know it, had no reason to believe so . . . and would not be interested if it were true; it
was preposterous to talk about anyone "owning" Mars; Mars belonged to the Martians. So? Let's
propose a hypothetical question, Doctor; if someone were trying to- But Dr. Nelson had switched
off. When Caxton tried to reconnect, a recorded voice stated sweetly: "The subscriber has
voluntarily suspended service temporarily. If you care to record-" Caxton switched off.
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 42 -
Caxton made a foolish statement concerning Dr. Nelson's parentage. But what he did next
was much more foolish; he phoned the Executive Palace, demanded to speak to the Secretary
General.
His action was more a reflex than a plan. In his years as a snooper, first as a reporter, then
as a lippmann, he had learned that close-held secrets could often be cracked by going all the way to
the top and there making himself unbearably unpleasant. He knew that such twisting of the tiger's
tail was dangerous, for he understood the psychopathology of great power as thoroughly as Jill
Boardman lacked knowledge of it-but he had habitually relied on his relative safety as a dealer in
still another sort of power almost universally feared and appeased by the powerful.
What he forgot was, that in phoning the Palace from a taxicab, he was not doing so publicly.
Caxton was not put through to the Secretary General, nor had he expected to be. Instead he
spoke with half a dozen underlings and became more aggressive with each one. He was so busy
that he did not notice it when his cab ceased to hover and left the parking level.
When he did notice it, it was too late; the cab refused to obey the orders he at once punched
into it. Caxton realized bitterly that he had let himself be trapped by a means no professional
hoodlum would fall for: his call had been traced, his cab identified, its idiot robot pilot placed under
orders of an over-riding police frequency-and the cab itself was being used to arrest him and fetch
him in, all most privately and with no fuss,
He wished keenly that he had kept Fair Witness Cavendish with him. But he wasted no time
on this futility but cleared the useless call from the radio and tried at once to call his lawyer, Mark
Frisby.
He was still trying when the taxicab landed inside a courtyard landing fiat and his signal
was cut off by its walls. He then tried to leave the cab, found that the door would not open-and was
hardly surprised to discover that he was becoming very light-headed and was fast losing
consciousnessVIII
JILL TRIED TO TELL HERSELF that Ben had gone charging off on another Scent and simply had
forgotten (or had not taken time) to let her know. But she did not believe it. Ben, incredibly busy as
he was, owed much of his success, both professional and social, to meticulous attention to human
details. He remembered birthdays and would rather have weiched on a poker debt than have
forgotten to write a bread-and-butter note. No matter where he had gone, nor how urgent the
errand, he could have-and would have!-at least taken two minutes while in the air to record a
reassuring message to her at her home or at the Center. It was an unvarying characteristic of Ben,
she reminded herself, the thing that made him a lovable beast in spite of his many faults.
He must have left word for her! She called his office again at her lunch break and spoke
with Ben's researcher and office chief, Osbert Kilgallen. He assured her solemnly that Ben had left
no message for her, nor had any come in since she had called earlier.
She could see past his head in the screen that there were other people in the office; she
decided it was a poor time to mention the Man from Mars. "Did he say where he was going? Or
when he would be back?"
"No. But that is not unusual. We always have a few spare columns on the hook to fill in
when one of these things comes up."
"Well ... where did he call you from? Or am I being too snoopy?"
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 43 -
"Not at all, Miss floardman. He did not call; it was a statprint message, filed from Paoli Flat
in Philadelphia as I recall."
Jill had to be satisfied with that. She lunched in the nurses' dining room and tried to interest
herself in food. It wasn't, she told herself, as if anything were really wrong . . . or as if she were in
love with the lunk or anything silly like that.
"Hey! Boardman! Snap out of the fog-I asked you a question."
Jill looked up to find Molly Wheelwright, the wing's dietician, looking at her. "Sorry. I was
thinking about something else."
"I said, 'Since when does your floor put charity patients in luxury suites?'
"Isn't K-12 on your floor? Or have they moved you?"
"K-12? Certainly. But that's not a charity case; it's a rich old woman, wealthy that she can
pay to have a doctor watch every breath she draws."
"Humph! If she's wealthy, she must have come into money awfully suddenly. She's been in
the N.P. ward of the geriatrics sanctuary for the past seventeen months."
"Must be some mistake."
"Not mine-I don't let mistakes happen in my diet kitchen. That tray is a tricky one and I
check it myself-fat-free diet (she's had her gall bladder out) and a long list of sensitivities, plus
concealed medication. Believe me, dear, a diet order can be as individual as a fingerprint." Miss
Wheelwright stood up. "Gotta run, chicks. I wish they would let me run this kitchen for a while.
Hogwallow Cafeteria!"
"What was Molly sounding off about?" one of the nurses asked.
"Nothing. She's just mixed up." But Jill continued to think about it. It occurred to her that
she might locate the Man from Mars by making inquiries around the diet kitchens. She put the idea
out of her mind; it would take a full day to visit all the diet kitchens in the acres of ground covered
by the sprawling buildings. Bethesda Center had been founded as a naval hospital back in the days
when wars were fought on oceans; it had been enormous even then. It had been transferred later to
Health, Education, & Welfare and had expanded; now it belonged to the Federation and was still
larger, a small city.
But there was something odd about Mrs. Bankerson's case. The hospital accepted all classes
of patients, private, charity, and government; the floor Jill was working on usually had only
government patients and its luxury suites were occupied by Federation Senators or other official
guests able to command flossy service. It was unusual for a paying private patient to have a suite on
her floor, or to be on her floor in any status.
Of course Mrs. Bankerson could be overflow, if the part of the Center open to the feepaying
public had no such suite available. Yes, probably that was it.
She was too rushed for a while after lunch to think about it, being busy with incoming
patients. Shortly a situation came up in which she needed a powered bed. The routine action would
be to phone for one to be sent up-but the storage room was in the basement a quarter of a mile away
and Jill wanted the bed at once. She recalled that she had seen the powered bed which was
normally in the bedroom of suite K-l2 parked in the sitting room of that suite; she remembered
telling one of those marine
guards not to sit on it. Apparently it had Simply been shoved in there to get it out of the way when
the flotation bed had been installed for Smith.
Possibly it was still sitting there, gathering dust and still charged out to the floor. Powered
beds were always in short supply and cost six times as much as an ordinary bed. While, strictly
speaking, it was the wing superintendent's worry, Jill saw no reason to let overhead charges for her
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 44 -
floor run up unnecessarily-and besides, if it was still there, she could get it at once. She decided to
find out.
The sitting room door was still locked. She was startled to find that her pass key would not
open it. Making a mental note to tell maintenance to repair the lock, she went on down the corridor
to the watch room of the suite, intending to find out about the bed from the doctor watching over
Mrs. Bankerson.
The physician on watch was the same one she had met before, Dr. Brush. He was not an
intern, nor a resident, but had been brought in for this patient, Jill had learned from him, by Dr.
Garner. Brush looked up as she put her head in. "Miss Boardman! Just the person I want to see!"
"Why didn't you ring? How's your patient?"
"She's all right," he answered, glancing up at the Peeping Tom, "But I definitely am not."
"Trouble?"
"Some trouble. About five minutes' worth. And my relief is not in the building. Nurse, could
you spare me about that many minutes of your valuable time? And then keep your mouth shut
afterwards?"
"I suppose so. I told my assistant floor supervisor I would be away for a few minutes. Let
me use your phone and I'll tell her where to find me."
"No!" he said urgently. "Just lock that door after I leave and don't let anybody in until you
hear me rap 'Shave and a Haircut' on it, that's a good girl."
"All right, sir," Jill said dubiously. "Am I to do anything for your patient?"
"No, no, just sit there at the desk and watch her in the screen. You won't have to do
anything. Don't disturb her."
"Well, if anything does happen, where will you be? In the doctors' lounge?"
"I'm not going that far-just to the men's washroom down the corridor. Now shut up, please,
and let me go-this is urgent."
He left and Jill obeyed his order to lock the door after him. Then she looked at the patient
through the viewer and ran her eye over the dials. The elderly woman was again asleep and the
displays showed her pulse strong and her breathing even and normal; Jill wondered why Dr. Garner
considered a "death watch" necessary?
Then she remembered why she had come in there in the first place and decided that she
might as well find out if the bed was in the far room without bothering Dr. Brush about it. While it
was not quite according to Dr. Brush's instructions, she would not be disturbing his patientcertainly
she knew how to walk through a room without waking a sleeping patient!-and she had
decided years ago that what doctors did not know rarely hurt them. She opened the door quietly and
went in.
A quick glance assured her that Mrs. Bankerson was in the typical sleep of the senile.
Walking noiselessly she went past her to the door to the sitting room. It was locked but her pass key
let her in.
She was pleased to see that the powered bed was there. Then she saw that the room was
occupied-sitting in an arm chair with a picture book in his lap was the Man from Mars.
Smith looked up and gave her the beaming smile of a delighted baby.
Jill felt dizzy, as if she had been jerked out of sleep. Jumbled ideas raced through her mind.
Valentine Smith here? But he couldn't be; he had been transferred somewhere else; the log showed
it. But he was here.
Then all the ugly implications and possibilities seemed to line themselves up . - - the fake
"Man from Mars" on stereo ... the old woman out there, ready to die, but in the meantime covering
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 45 -
the fact that there was another patient in here . . . the door that would not open to her pass-key-and,
lastly, a horrid vision of the "meat wagon" wheeling out of here some night, with a sheet concealing
the fact that it carried not one cadaver, but two.
When this last nightmare rushed through her mind, it carried in its train a cold wind of fear,
the realization that she herself was in peril through having stumbled Onto this top-secret fact.
Smith got clumsily up from his chair, held out both hands while still smiling and said,
"Water brother!"
"Hello. Uh ... how are you?"
"I am well. I am happy." He added something in a strange, choking speech, then corrected
himself and said carefully, "You are here, my brother. You were away. Now you are here. I drink
deep of you."
Jill felt herself helplessly split between two emotions, one that crushed and melted her
heart-and an icy fear of being caught here. Smith did not seem to notice. Instead he said, "See? I
walk! I grow strong." He demonstrated by taking a few steps back and forth, then stopped,
triumphant, breathless, and smiling in front of her.
She forced herself to smile. "We are making progress, aren't we? You
keep growing stronger, that's the spirit! But I must go now-I just stopped in to say hello."
His expression changed instantly to distress. "Do not go!"
"Oh, but I must!"
He continued to look woebegone, then added with tragic certainty, "I have hurted you. I did
not know."
"Hurt me? Oh, no, not at all! But I must go-and quickly!"
His face was without expression. He stated rather than asked, "Take me with you, my
brother."
"What? Oh, I can't. And I must go, at once. Look, don't tell anyone that I was in here,
please!"
"Not tell that my water brother was here?"
"Yes. Don't tell anyone. Uh, I'll try to come back, I really will. You be a good boy and wait
and don't tell anyone."
Smith digested this, looked serene. "I will wait. I will not tell."
"Good!" Jill wondered how the devil she possibly could get back in to see him-she certainly
couldn't depend on Dr. Brush having another convenient case of trots. She realized now that the
"broken" lock had not been broken and her eye swept around to the corridor door-and she saw why
she had not been able to get in. A hand bolt had been screwed to the surface of the door, making a
pass key useless. As was always the case with hospitals, bathroom doors and other doors that could
be bolted were so arranged as to open also by pass key, so that patients irresponsible or unruly
could not lock themselves away from the nurses. But here the locked door kept Smith in, and the
addition of a simple hand bolt of the sort not permitted in hospitals served to keep out even those
with pass keys.
Jill walked over and opened the bolt. "You wait. I'll come back."
"I shall waiting."
When she got back to the watch room she heard already knocking the Tock! Tocki Ti-toe/c
tocki - . . Tock, tock! signal that Brush had said he would use; she hurried to let him in.
He burst in, saying savagely, "Where the hell were you, nurse? I knocked three times." He
glanced suspiciously at the inner door.
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 46 -
"I saw your patient turn over in her sleep," she lied quickly. "I was in arranging her collar
pillow."
"Damn it, I told you simply to sit at my desk!"
Jill knew suddenly that the man was even more frightened than she was-and with more
reason. She counter-attacked. "Doctor, I did you a favor," she said coldly. "Your patient is not
properly the responsibility of the floor supervisor in the first place. But since you entrusted her to
me, I had to do what seemed necessary in your absence. Since you have questioned what I have
done, let's get the wing superintendent and settle the matter."
"Huh? No, no-forget it."
"No, sir. I don't like to have my professional actions questioned without cause. As you
know very well, a patient that old can smother in a water bed; I did what was necessary. Some
nurses will take any blame from a doctor, but I am not one of them. So let's call the
superintendent."
"What? Look, Miss Boardman, I'm sorry I said anything. I was upset and I popped off
without thinking. I apologize."
"Very well, Doctor," Jill answered stiffly. "Is there anything more I can do for you?"
"Uh? No, thank you. Thanks for standing by for me. Just ... well, be sure not to mention it,
will you?"
"I won't mention it." You can bet your sweet life I won't mention it, Jill added silently. But
what do I do now? Oh, I wish Ben were in town! She got back to her duty desk, nodded to her
assistant, and pretended to look over some papers. Finally she remembered to phone for the
powered bed she had been after in the first place. Then she sent her assistant to look at the patient
who needed the bed (now temporarily resting in the ordinary type) and tried to think.
Where was Ben? If he were only in touch, she would take ten minutes relief, call him, and
shift the worry onto his broad shoulders. But Ben, damn him, was oft' skyoodling somewhere and
letting her carry the ball.
Or was he? A fretful suspicion that had been burrowing around in her subconscious all day
finally surfaced and looked her in the eye, and this time she returned the stare: Ben Caxton would
not have left town without letting her know the outcome of his attempt to see the Man from Mars.
As a fellow conspirator it was her right to receive a report and Ben always played fair . . . always.
She could hear sounding in her head something he had said on the ride back from
Hagerstown: "-if anything goes wrong, you are my ace in the hole . . . honey. ~f you don't hear
from me, you are on your own,"
She had not thought seriously about it at the time, as she had not really believed that
anything could happen to Ben. Now she thought about it for a long time, while trying to continue
her duties. There comes a time in the life of every human when he or she must decide to risk "his
life, his fortune, and his sacred honor" on an outcome dubious. Those who fail the challenge are
merely overgrown children, can never be anything else. Jill Boardman encountered her personal
challenge-and accepted it-at 3:47 that afternoon while convincing a ward visitor that he simply
could not
bring a dog onto the floor even though he had managed to slip it past the receptionist and even if
the sight of this dog was just what the patient needed.
The Man from Mars sat down again when Jill left. He did not pick up the picture book they
had given him but simply waited in a fashion which may be described as "patient" only because
human language does not embrace Martian emotions nor attitudes. He merely held still with quiet
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 47 -
happiness because his brother had said that he would return. He was prepared to wait, without
doing anything, without moving, for several years if necessary.
He had no clear idea how long it had been since he had first shared water with this brother;
not only was this place curiously distorted in time and shape, with sequences of sights and sounds
and experiences new to him and not yet grokked, but also the culture of his nest took a different
grasp of time from that which is human. The difference lay not in their much longer lifetimes as
counted in Earth years, but in a basically different attitude. The sentence, "It is later than you
think," could not have been expressed in Martian-nor could "Haste makes waste," though for a
different reason: the first notion was inconceivable while the latter was an unexpressed Martian
basic, as unnecessary as telling a fish to bathe. But the quotation, "As it was in the Beginning, is
now and ever shall be," was so Martian in mood that it could be translated more easily than "two
plus two makes four"-which was not a truism on Mars.
Smith waited.
Brush came in and looked at him; Smith did not move and Brush went away.
When Smith heard a key in the Outer door, he recalled that this sound had been one that he
had heard somewhat before the last visit of his water brother, so he shifted his metabolism in
preparation, in case the sequence occurred again. He was astonished when the door opened and Jill
slipped in, as he had not been aware that the outer door was a door. But he grokked it at once and
gave himself over to the joyful fullness which comes only in the presence of one's own nestlings,
one's chosen water brothers, and (under certain circumstances) in the presence of the Old Ones.
His joy was somewhat sullied by immediate awareness that his brother did not fully share it
. . - in truth, he seemed more distressed than was possible save in one about to discorporate because
of some shameful lack or failure.
But Smith had already learned that these creatures, so much like himself in some ways,
could endure emotions dreadful to contemplate and still not die. His Brother Mahmoud underwent
a spiritual agony five times daily and not only did not die but had urged the agony on him as a
needful thing. His Brother Captain van Tromp suffered terrifying spasms unpredictably, any one of
which should have, by Smith's standards, produced immediate discorporation to end the conflict-yet
that brother was still corporate so far as he knew.
So he ignored Jill's agitation.
Jill handed him a bundle. "Here, put these on. Hurry!"
Smith accepted the bundle and stood waiting. Jill looked at him and said, "Oh, dear! All
right, get your clothes off. I'll help you."
She was forced to do more than help; she had to undress and dress him. He had been
wearing a hospital gown, a bathrobe, and slippers, not because he wanted them but because he had
been told to wear them. He could handle them himself by now, but not fast enough to Suit Jill; she
skinned him quickly. She being a nurse and he never having heard of the modesty taboo-nor would
he have grasped an explanation-they were not slowed up by irrelevancies; the difficulties were
purely mechanical. He was delighted and surprised by the long false skins Jill drew over his legs,
but she gave him no time to cherish them, but taped the women's stockings to his thighs in lieu of a
garter belt. The nurse's uniform she dressed him in was not her own, but one that she had borrowed
from a larger woman on the excuse that a cousin of hers needed one for a masquerade party. Jill
hooked a nurse's cape around his neck and reflected that its all-enclosing straight drape covered
most of the primary and secondary sex characteristics-at least she hoped that it would. The shoes
were more difficult, as they did not fit well and Smith still found standing and walking in this
gravity field an effort even barefooted.
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 48 -
But at last she got him covered and pinned a nurse's cap on his head. "Your hair isn't very
long," she said anxiously, "but it is practically as long as a lot of the girls wear it and it will have to
do." Smith did not answer as he had not understood much of the remark. He tried to think his hair
longer but realized that it would take time.
"Now," said Jill. "Listen carefully. No matter what happens, don't say a word. I'll do all the
talking. Do you understand me?"
"Don't talk. I will not talk."
"Just come with me-I'll hold your hand. And don't say a word. But if you know any prayers,
pray!"
"Pray?"
"Never mind. You just come along and don't talk." She opened the quick glance outside,
then took his hand and led him out into the corridor.
No one seemed especially interested. Smith found the many strange configurations
upsetting in the extreme; he was assaulted by images he could not bring into focus. He stumbled
blindly along beside Jill, with his eyes and senses almost disconnected to protect himself against
chaos.
She led him to the end of the corridor and stepped on a slide-away leading crosswise. He
almost fell down and would have done so if Jill had not caught him. A chambermaid looked
curiously at them and Jill cursed under her breath-then was very careful in helping him off. They
took an elevator to the roof, Jill being quite sure that she could never pilot him up a bounce tube.
On the roof they encountered a major crisis, though Smith was not aware of it. He was
undergoing the keen delight of seeing sky; he had not seen sky since the sky of Mars. This sky was
bright and colorful and joyful
-it being a typical overcast Washington grey day. In the meantime Jill was looking around
helplessly for a taxi. The roof was almost deserted, something she had counted on, since most of
the nurses who came off duty when she did were already headed home fifteen minutes ago and the
afternoon visitors were gone. But the taxis were, of course, gone too. She did not dare risk an air
bus, even though one which went her way would be along in a few minutes.
She was about to call a taxi when one headed in for a landing. She called to the roof
attendant. "Jack! Is that cab taken? I need one."
"It's probably the one I called for Dr. Phipps."
"Oh, dear! Jack, see how quick you can get me another one, will you? This is my cousin
Madge-she works over in South Wing-and she has a terrible laryngitis and I want to get her out of
this wind."
The attendant looked dubiously toward the phone in his booth and scratched his head. "Well
... seeing it's you, Miss Boardman, I'll let you take this one and call another one for Dr. Phipps.
How's that?"
"Oh, Jack, you're a lamb! No, Madge, don't try to talk; I'll thank him. Her voice is gone
completely; I'm going to take her home and bake it out with hot rum."
"That ought to do it. Old-fashioned remedies are always best, my mother used to say." He
reached into the cab and punched the combination for Jill's home from memory, then helped them
in. Jill managed to get in the way and thereby cover up Smith's unfamiliarity with this common
ceremonial. "Thanks, Jack. Thanks loads."
The cab took off and Jill took her first deep breath. "You can talk
"What should I say?"
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 49 -
"Huh? Nothing. Anything. Whatever you like."
Smith thought this over. The scope of the invitation obviously called for a worthy answer,
suitable to brothers. He thought of several, discarded them because he did not know how to
translate them, then settled on one which he thought he could translate fairly well but which
nevertheless conveyed even in this strange, flat speech some of the warm growing-closer brothers
should enjoy. "Let our eggs share the same nest."
Jill looked startled. "Huh? What did you say?"
Smith felt distressed at the failure to respond in kind and interpreted it as failure on his own
part. He realized miserably that, time after time, he had managed to bring agitation to these other
creatures when his purpose had been to create oneness. He tried again, rearranging his sparse
vocabulary to enfold the thought somewhat differently. "My nest is yours and your nest is mine."
This time Jill managed to smile. "Why, how sweet! My dear, I am not sure that I understand
you, but if I do, that is the nicest offer I have had in a long time." She added, "But right now we are
up to our ears in trouble- so let's wait a while, shall we?"
Smith had understood Jill hardly more than Jill had understood him, but he caught his water
brother's pleased mood and understood the suggestion to wait. Waiting was something he did
without effort, so he sat back, satisfied that all was well between himself and his brother, and
enjoyed the scenery. It was the first time he had seen this place from the air and on every side there
was a richness of new things to try to grok. It occurred to him that the apportation used at home did
not permit this delightful viewing of what lay between. This thought almost led him to a
comparison of Martian and human methods not favorable to the Old Ones, but his mind
automatically shied away from heresy.
Jill kept quiet, too, and tried to get her thoughts straight. Suddenly she realized that the cab
was heading down the final traffic leg toward the apartment house where she lived-and she realized
just as quickly that home was the last place for her to go, it being the first place they would look
once they figured out how Smith had escaped and who had helped him. She did not kid herself that
she had covered her tracks. While she knew nothing of police methods, she supposed that she must
have left fingerprints in Smith's room, not to mention the people who had seen them walk out. It
was even possible (so she had heard) for a technician to read the tape in this cab's pilot and tell
exactly what trips it had made that day and where and when.
She reached forward, slapped the order keys, and cleared the instruction to go to her
apartment house. She did not know whether that would wipe the tape or not-but she was not going
to head for a place where the police might already be waiting.
The cab checked its forward motion, rose out of the traffic lane and hovered. Where could
she go? Where in all this swarming city could she hide a grown man who was half idiot and could
not even dress himself?-a man who was the most sought-after person on the globe? Oh, if Ben were
only here! Ben - - - where are you?
She reached forward again, picked up the phone and rather hopelessly punched Ben's
number, expecting to hear the detached voice of an automation inviting her to record a message.
Her spirits jumped when a man's voice answered . - . then slumped again when she realized that it
was not Ben but his majordomo, Osbert Kilgallen. "Oh. Sorry, Mr. Kilgallen. This is Jill
Boardman. I thought I had called Mr. Caxton's home."
"You did. But I always have his home calls relayed to the office when he is away more than
twenty-four hours."
"Then he is still away?"
"I'm afraid so. Is there anything I can do for you?"
“Stranger In A Strange Land” by Robert Heinlein
 - 50 -
"Uh, no. Look, Mr. Kilgallen, isn't it strange that Ben should just drop out of sight? Aren't
you worried about him?"
"Eh? Why should I be? His message said that he did not know how long he would be
away."
"Isn't that rather odd in itself?"
"Not in Mr. Caxton's work, Miss Boardman."
"Well ... I think there is something very odd about his being away this time! I think you
ought to report it. You ought to spread it over every news service in the country-in the world!"
Even though the cab's phone had no vision circuit Jill felt Osbert Kilgallen draw himself up.
"I'm afraid, Miss Boardman, that I will have to interpret my employer's instructions myself. Uh - - .
if you don't mind my saying so, there is always some . . 'good friend' phoning Mr. Caxton
frantically every time he leaves town."
Some babe trying to get a hammer lock on him, Jill interpreted angrily-and this Osbert
character thinks I'm the current one. It put out of her mind the half-formed thought of asking
Kilgallen for help; she switched off as quickly as possible.
But where could she go? The obvious solution popped into her mind. If Ben was missingand
the authorities had a hand in it-the last place they would be likely to look for Valentine Smith
would be Ben's apartment. Unless, she corrected, they connected her with Ben, which she did not
think that they did.
They could dig a bite to eat out of Ben's buttery-she wouldn't risk ordering anything from
the basement; they might know he was away. And she could borrow some of Ben's clothes for her
idiot child. The last point settled it; she set the combination for Ben's apartment house. The cab
picked out the new lane and dropped into it.
Once outside the door to Ben's fiat Jill put her face to the hush box by the door and said
emphatically, "Karthago delenda est!"
Nothing happened. Oh damn him! she said frantically to herself; he's changed the combo.
She stood there for a moment, knees weak, and kept her face away from Smith. Then she again
spoke into the hush box. It was a Raytheon lock, the same voice circuit actuated the door or
announced callers. She announced herself on the forlorn chance that Ben might have returned.
"Ben, this is Jill."
The door slid open.
They went inside and the door closed. Jill thought for an instant that Ben had let them in,
then she realized that she had accidentally hit on his new door combination . . . intended, she
guessed, as a gracious compliment combined with a wolf tactic. She felt that she could have
dispensed with the compliment to have avoided the awful panic she had felt when the door had
refused to open.
Smith stood quietly at the edge of the thick green lawn and looked at the room. It again was
a place so new to him as not to be grokked at once, but he felt immediately pleased with it. It was
less exciting than the moving place they had just been in, but in many ways more suited for
enfolding together the self. He looked with interest at the view window at one end but did not
recognize it as a window, mistaking it for a living picture like those he had been used to at homethe
suite he had been in at Bethesda contained no windows, it being in one of the newer wings, and
thus far he had never acquired the idea of "window."
He noticed with approval that the simulation of depth and movement in the "picture" was
perfect-some very great artist among these people must have created it. Up until this time he had