The Healer's name was Fords Deep Waters.
Because he was a soul, by nature he was all things good: compassionate, patient, honest,
virtuous, and full of love. Anxiety was an unusual emotion for Fords Deep Waters.
Irritation was even rarer. However, because Fords Deep Waters lived inside a human body,
irritation was sometimes inescapable.
As the whispers of the Healing students buzzed in the far corner of the operating room, his lips
pressed together into a tight line. The expression felt out of place on a mouth more often given
to smiling.
Darren, his regular assistant, saw the grimace and patted his shoulder.
“They're just curious, Fords,” he said quietly.
“An insertion is hardly an interesting or challenging procedure. Any soul on the street could
perform it in an emergency. There's nothing for them to learn by observing today.” Fords was
surprised to hear the sharp edge marring his normally soothing voice.
“They've never seen a grown human before,
way. She'll already have far too much to deal with as she acclimates. It's not fair to put her
through this.” Bythis, he did not mean the gawking. Fords heard the sharp edge return to his
voice.
Darren patted him again. “It will be fine. The Seeker needs information and –”
At the wordSeeker, Fords gave Darren a look that could only be described as a glare. Darren
blinked in shock.
“I'm sorry,” Fords apologized at once. “I didn't mean to react so negatively. It's just that I fear
for this soul.”
His eyes moved to the cryotank on its stand beside the table. The light was a steady, dull red,
indicating that it was occupied and in hibernation mode.
“This soul was specially picked for the assignment,” Darren said soothingly. “She is exceptional
among our kind–braver than most. Her lives speak for themselves. I think she would volunteer,
if it were possible to ask her.”
“Who among us would not volunteer if asked to do something for the greater good? But is that
really the case here? Is the greater good served by this? The question is not her willingness, but
what it is right to ask any soul to bear.”
The Healing students were discussing the hibernating soul as well. Fords could hear the
whispers clearly; their voices were rising now, getting louder with their excitement.
“She's lived on six planets.”
“I heard seven.”
“I heard she's never lived two terms as the same host species.”
“Is that possible?”
“She's been almost everything. A Flower, a Bear, a Spider –”
“A See Weed, a Bat –”
“Even a Dragon!”
“I don't believe it–not seven planets.”
“At least seven. She started on the Origin.”
“Really? The Origin?”
“Quiet, please!” Fords interrupted. “If you cannot observe professionally and silently, then I will
have to ask you to remove yourselves.”
Abashed, the six students fell silent and edged away from one another.
“Let's get on with this, Darren.”
Everything was prepared. The appropriate medicines were laid out beside the human girl. Her
long dark hair was secured beneath a surgical cap, exposing her slender neck. Deeply sedated,
she breathed slowly in and out. Her sun-browned skin had barely a mark to show for her…
accident.
“Begin thaw sequence now, please, Darren.”
The gray-haired assistant was already waiting beside the cryotank, his hand resting on the dial.
He flipped the safety back and spun down on the dial. The red light atop the small gray cylinder
began to pulse, flashing faster as the seconds passed, changing color.
Fords concentrated on the unconscious body; he edged the scalpel through the skin at the base
of the subject's skull with small, precise movements, and then sprayed on the medication that
stilled the excess flow of blood before he widened the fissure. Fords delved delicately beneath
the neck muscles, careful not to injure them, exposing the pale bones at the top of the spinal
column.
“The soul is ready, Fords,” Darren informed him.
“So am I. Bring her.”
Fords felt Darren at his elbow and knew without looking that his assistant would be prepared,
his hand stretched out and waiting; they had worked together for many years now. Fords held
the gap open.
“Send her home,” he whispered.
Darren's hand moved into view, the silver gleam of an awaking soul in his cupped palm.
Fords never saw an exposed soul without being struck by the beauty of it.
The soul shone in the brilliant lights of the operating room, brighter than the reflective silver
instrument in his hand. Like a living ribbon, she twisted and rippled, stretching, happy to be free
of the cryotank. Her thin, feathery attachments, nearly a thousand of them, billowed softly like
pale silver hair. Though they were all lovely, this one seemed particularly graceful to Fords Deep 
Waters.
He was not alone in his reaction. He heard Darren's soft sigh, heard the admiring murmurs of
the students.
Gently, Darren placed the small glistening creature inside the opening Fords had made in the
human's neck. The soul slid smoothly into the offered space, weaving herself into the alien
anatomy. Fords admired the skill with which she possessed her new home. Her attachments
wound tightly into place around the nerve centers, some elongating and reaching deeper to
where he couldn't see, under and up into the brain, the optic nerves, the ear canals. She was very
quick, very firm in her movements. Soon, only one small segment of her glistening body was
visible.
“Well done,” he whispered to her, knowing that she could not hear him. The human girl was
the one with ears, and she still slept soundly.
It was a routine matter to finish the job. He cleaned and healed the wound, applied the salve
that sealed the incision closed behind the soul, and then brushed the scar-softening powder
across the line left on her neck.
“Perfect, as usual,” said the assistant, who, for some reason unfathomable to Fords, had never
made a change from his human host's name, Darren.
Fords sighed. “I regret this day's work.”
“You're only doing your duty as a Healer.”
“This is the rare occasion when Healing creates an injury.”
Darren began to clean up the workstation. He didn't seem to know how to answer. Fords was
filling his Calling. That was enough for Darren.
But not enough for Fords Deep Waters, who was a true Healer to the core of his being. He
gazed anxiously at the human female's body, peaceful in slumber, knowing that this peace
would be shattered as soon as she awoke. All the horror of this young woman's end would be
borne by the innocent soul he'd just placed inside her.
As he leaned over the human and whispered in her ear, Fords wished fervently that the soul
inside could hear him now.
“Good luck, little wanderer, good luck. How I wish you didn't need it.”
CHAPTER 1
Remembered
Iknew it would begin with the end, and the end would look like death to these eyes. I had been
warned.
Notthese eyes.My eyes. Mine. This wasme now.
The language I found myself using was odd, but it made sense. Choppy, boxy, blind, and linear.
Impossibly crippled in comparison to many I'd used, yet still it managed to find fluidity and
expression. Sometimes beauty. My language now. My native tongue.
With the truest instinct of my kind, I'd bound myself securely into the body's center of thought,
twined myself inescapably into its every breath and reflex until it was no longer a separate
entity. It was me.
Notthe body,my body.
I felt the sedation wearing off and lucidity taking its place. I braced myself for the onslaught of
the first memory, which would really be the last memory–the last moments this body had
experienced, the memory of the end. I had been warned thoroughly of what would happen now.
These human emotions would be stronger, more vital than the feelings of any other species I had
been. I had tried to prepare myself.
The memory came. And, as I'd been warned, it was not something that could ever be prepared
for.
It seared with sharp color and ringing sound. Cold on her skin, pain gripping her limbs, burning
them. The taste was fiercely metallic in her mouth. And there was the new sense, the fifth sense
I'd never had, that took the particles from the air and transformed them into strange messages
and pleasures and warnings in her brain–scents. They were distracting, confusing to me, but not
to her memory. The memory had no time for the novelties of smell. The memory was only fear.
Fear locked her in a vise, goading the blunt, clumsy limbs forward but hampering them at the
same time. To flee, to run–it was all she could do.
I've failed.
The memory that was not mine was so frighteningly strong and clear that it sliced through my
control–overwhelmed the detachment, the knowledge that this was just a memory and not me.
Sucked into the hell that was the last minute of her life, I was she, and we were running.
It's so dark. I can't see. I can't see the floor. I can't see my hands stretched out in front of me. I
run blind and try to hear the pursuit I can feel behind me, but the pulse is so loud behind my ears
it drowns everything else out.
It's cold. It shouldn't matter now, but it hurts. I'm so cold.
The air in her nose was uncomfortable. Bad. A bad smell. For one second, that discomfort
pulled me free of the memory. But it was only a second, and then I was dragged in again, and
my eyes filled with horrified tears.
I'm lost, we're lost. It's over.
They're right behind me now, loud and close. There are so many footsteps! I am alone. I've
failed.
The Seekers are calling. The sound of their voices twists my stomach. I'm going to be sick.
“It's fine, it's fine,” one lies, trying to calm me, to slow me. Her voice is disturbed by the effort
of her breathing.
“Be careful!” another shouts in warning.
“Don't hurt yourself,” one of them pleads. A deep voice, full of concern.
Concern!
Heat shot through my veins, and a violent hatred nearly choked me.
I had never felt such an emotion as this in all my lives. For another second, my revulsion pulled
me away from the memory. A high, shrill keening pierced my ears and pulsed in my head. The
sound scraped through my airways. There was a weak pain in my throat.
Screaming,my body explained.You're screaming.
I froze in shock, and the sound broke off abruptly.
This was not a memory.
My body–she wasthinking!Speaking to me!
But the memory was stronger, in that moment, than my astonishment.
“Please!” they cry. “There is danger ahead!”
The danger is behind!I scream back in my mind. But I see what they mean. A feeble stream of
light, coming from who knows where, shines on the end of the hall. It is not the flat wall or the
locked door, the dead end I feared and expected. It is a black hole.
An elevator shaft. Abandoned, empty, and condemned, like this building. Once a hiding place,
now a tomb.
A surge of relief floods through me as I race forward. There is a way. No way to survive, but
perhaps a way to win.
No, no, no!This thought was all mine, and I fought to pull myself away from her, but we were
together. And we sprinted for the edge of death.
“Please!” The shouts are more desperate.
I feel like laughing when I know that I am fast enough. I imagine their hands clutching for me
just inches behind my back. But I am as fast as I need to be. I don't even pause at the end of the
floor. The hole rises up to meet me midstride.
The emptiness swallows me. My legs flail, useless. My hands grip the air, claw through it,
searching for anything solid. Cold blows past me like tornado winds.
I hear the thud before I feel it.… The wind is gone.…
And then pain is everywhere.… Pain is everything.
Make it stop.
Not high enough,I whisper to myself through the pain.
When will the pain end? When… ?
The blackness swallowed up the agony, and I was weak with gratitude that the memory had
come to this most final of conclusions. The blackness took all, and I was free. I took a breath to
steady myself, as was this body's habit.My body.
But then the color rushed back, the memory reared up and engulfed me again.
No!I panicked, fearing the cold and the pain and the very fear itself.
But this was not the same memory. This was a memory within a memory–a final memory, like a
last gasp of air–yet, somehow, even stronger than the first.
The blackness took all but this: a face.
The face was as alien to me as the faceless serpentine tentacles of my last host body would be
to this new body. I'd seen this kind of face in the images I had been given to prepare for this 
world. It was hard to tell them apart, to see the tiny variations in color and shape that were the
only markers of the individual. So much the same, all of them. Noses centered in the middle of
the sphere, eyes above and mouths below, ears around the sides. A collection of senses, all but
touch, concentrated in one place. Skin over bones, hair growing on the crown and in strange
furry lines above the eyes. Some had more fur lower down on the jaw; those were always males.
The colors ranged through the brown scale from pale cream to a deep almost-black. Aside from
that, how to know one from the other?
This face I would have known among millions.
This face was a hard rectangle, the shape of the bones strong under the skin. In color it was a
light golden brown. The hair was just a few shades darker than the skin, except where flaxen
streaks lightened it, and it covered only the head and the odd fur stripes above the eyes. The
circular irises in the white eyeballs were darker than the hair but, like the hair, flecked with light.
There were small lines around the eyes, and her memories told me the lines were from smiling
and squinting into sunlight.
I knew nothing of what passed for beauty among these strangers, and yet I knew that this face
was beautiful. I wanted to keep looking at it. As soon as I realized this, it disappeared.
Mine,spoke the alien thought that should not have existed.
Again, I was frozen, stunned. There should have been no one here but me. And yet this thought
was so strong and so aware!
Impossible. How was she still here? This was me now.
Mine,I rebuked her, the power and authority that belonged to me alone flowing through the
word.Everything is mine.
So why am I talking back to her?I wondered as the voices interrupted my thoughts.
CHAPTER 2
Overheard
The voices were soft and close and, though I was only now aware of them, apparently in the
middle of a murmured conversation.
“I'm afraid it's too much for her,” one said. The voice was soft but deep, male. “Too much for
anyone. Such violence!” The tone spoke of revulsion.
“She screamed only once,” said a higher, reedy, female voice, pointing this out with a hint of
glee, as if she were winning an argument.
“I know,” the man admitted. “She is very strong. Others have had much more trauma, with
much less cause.”
“I'm sure she'll be fine, just as I told you.”
“Maybe you missed your Calling.” There was an edge to the man's voice. Sarcasm, my memory
named it. “Perhaps you were meant to be a Healer, like me.”
The woman made a sound of amusement. Laughter. “I doubt that. We Seekers prefer a
different sort of diagnosis.”
My body knew this word, this title:Seeker. It sent a shudder of fear down my spine. A leftover
reaction. Of course,I had no reason to fear Seekers.
“I sometimes wonder if the infection of humanity touches those in your profession,” the man
mused, his voice still sour with annoyance. “Violence is part of your life choice. Does enough of
your body's native temperament linger to give you enjoyment of the horror?”
I was surprised at his accusation, at his tone. This discussion was almost like… an argument.
Something my host was familiar with but that I'd never experienced.
The woman was defensive. “We do not choose violence. We face it when we must. And it's a
good thing for the rest of you that some of us are strong enough for the unpleasantness. Your
peace would be shattered without our work.”
“Once upon a time. Your vocation will soon be obsolete, I think.”
“The error of that statement lies on the bed there.”
“One human girl, alone and unarmed! Yes, quite a threat to our peace.”
The woman breathed out heavily. A sigh. “But where did she come from? How did she appear
in the middle of Chicago, a city long since civilized, hundreds of miles from any trace of rebel
activity? Did she manage it alone?”
She listed the questions without seeming to seek an answer, as if she had already voiced them
many times.
“That's your problem, not mine,” the man said. “My job is to help this soul adapt herself to her
new host without unnecessary pain or trauma. And you are here to interfere with my job.”
Still slowly surfacing, acclimating myself to this new world of senses, I understood only now
that I was the subject of the conversation. I was the soul they spoke of. It was a new 
connotation to the word, a word that had meant many other things to my host. On every planet
we took a different name.Soul. I suppose it was an apt description. The unseen force that guides
the body.
“The answers to my questions matter as much as your responsibilities to the soul.”
“That's debatable.”
There was the sound of movement, and her voice was suddenly a whisper. “When will she
become responsive? The sedation must be about to wear off.”
“When she's ready. Leave her be. She deserves to handle the situation however she finds most
comfortable. Imagine the shock of her awakening–inside a rebel host injured to the point of
death in the escape attempt! No one should have to endure such trauma in times of peace!” His
voice rose with the increase of emotion.
“She is strong.” The woman's tone was reassuring now. “See how well she did with the first
memory, the worst memory. Whatever she expected, she handled this.”
“Why should she have to?” the man muttered, but he didn't seem to expect an answer.
The woman answered anyway. “If we're to get the information we need –”
“Needbeing your word. I would choose the termwant. ”
“Then someone must take on the unpleasantness,” she continued as if he had not interrupted.
“And I think, from all I know of this one, she would accept the challenge if there had been any
way to ask her. What do you call her?”
The man didn't speak for a long moment. The woman waited.
“Wanderer,” he finally and unwillingly answered.
“Fitting,” she said. “I don't have any official statistics, but she has to be one of the very few, if
not the only one, who has wandered so far. Yes,Wanderer will suit her well until she chooses a
new name for herself.”
He said nothing.
“Of course, she may assume the host's name.… We found no matches on record for the
fingerprints or retinal scan. I can't tell you what that name was.”
“She won't take the human name,” the man muttered.
Her response was conciliatory. “Everyone finds comfort their own way.”
“This Wanderer will need more comfort than most, thanks to your style of Seeking.”
There were sharp sounds–footsteps, staccato against a hard floor. When she spoke again, the
woman's voice was across the room from the man.
“You would have reacted poorly to the early days of this occupation,” she said.
“Perhaps you react poorly to peace.”
The woman laughed, but the sound was false–there was no real amusement. My mind seemed
well adapted to inferring the true meanings from tones and inflections.
“You do not have a clear perception of what my Calling entails. Long hours hunched over files
and maps. Mostly desk work. Not very often the conflict or violence you seem to think it is.”
“Ten days ago you were armed with killing weapons, running this body down.”
“The exception, I assure you, not the rule. Do not forget, the weapons that disgust you are
turned on our kind wherever we Seekers have not been vigilant enough. The humans kill us
happily whenever they have the ability to do so. Those whose lives have been touched by the
hostility see us as heroes.”
“You speak as if a war were raging.”
“To the remains of the human race, one is.”
These words were strong in my ears. My body reacted to them; I felt my breathing speed, heard
the sound of my heart pumping louder than was usual. Beside the bed I lay on, a machine
registered the increases with a muted beeping. The Healer and the Seeker were too involved in
their disagreement to notice.
“But one that even they must realize is long lost. They are outnumbered by what? A million to
one? I imagine you would know.”
“We estimate the odds are quite a bit higher in our favor,” she admitted grudgingly.
The Healer appeared to be content to let his side of the disagreement rest with that information.
It was quiet for a moment.
I used the empty time to evaluate my situation. Much was obvious.
I was in a Healing facility, recovering from an unusually traumatic insertion. I was sure the body 
that hosted me had been fully healed before it was given to me. A damaged host would have
been disposed of.
I considered the conflicting opinions of the Healer and the Seeker. According to the
information I had been given before making the choice to come here, the Healer had the right of
it. Hostilities with the few remaining pockets of humans were all but over. The planet called
Earth was as peaceful and serene as it looked from space, invitingly green and blue, wreathed in
its harmless white vapors. As was the way of the soul, harmony was universal now.
The verbal dissension between the Healer and the Seeker was out of character. Strangely
aggressive for our kind. It made me wonder. Could they be true, the whispered rumors that had
undulated like waves through the thoughts of the… of the…
I was distracted, trying to find the name for my last host species. We'd had a name, I knew that.
But, no longer connected to that host, I could not remember the word. We'd used much simpler
language than this, a silent language of thought that connected us all into one great mind. A
necessary convenience when one was rooted forever into the wet black soil.
I could describe that species in my new human language. We lived on the floor of the great
ocean that covered the entire surface of our world–a world that had a name, too, but that was
also gone. We each had a hundred arms and on each arm a thousand eyes, so that, with our
thoughts connected, not one sight in the vast waters went unseen. There was no need for sound,
so there was no way to hear it. We tasted the waters, and, with our sight, that told us all we
needed to know. We tasted the suns, so many leagues above the water, and turned their taste
into the food we needed.
I could describe us, but I could not name us. I sighed for the lost knowledge, and then returned
my ponderings to what I'd overheard.
Souls did not, as a rule, speak anything but the truth. Seekers, of course, had the requirements
of their Calling, but between souls there was never reason for a lie. With my last species'
language of thought, it would have been impossible to lie, even had we wanted to. However,
anchored as we were, we told ourselves stories to alleviate the boredom. Storytelling was the
most honored of all talents, for it benefited everyone.
Sometimes, fact mixed with fiction so thoroughly that, though no lies were told, it was hard to
remember what was strictly true.
When we thought of the new planet–Earth, so dry, so varied, and filled with such violent,
destructive denizens we could barely imagine them–our horror was sometimes overshadowed by
our excitement. Stories spun themselves quickly around the thrilling new subject. The
wars–wars! our kind having to fight!–were first reported accurately and then embellished and
fictionalized. When the stories conflicted with the official information I sought out, I naturally
believed the first reports.
But there were whispers of this: of human hosts so strong that the souls were forced to
abandon them. Hosts whose minds could not be completely suppressed. Souls who took on the
personality of the body, rather than the other way around. Stories. Wild rumors. Madness.
But that seemed almost to be the Healer's accusation.…
I dismissed the thought. The more likely meaning of his censure was the distaste most of us felt
for the Seeker's Calling. Who would choose a life of conflict and pursuit? Who would be
attracted to the chore of tracking down unwilling hosts and capturing them? Who would have
the stomach to face the violence of this particular species, the hostile humans who killed so
easily, so thoughtlessly? Here, on this planet, the Seekers had become practically a… militia–my
new brain supplied the term for the unfamiliar concept. Most believed that only the least
civilized souls, the least evolved, the lesser among us, would be drawn to the path of Seeker.
Still, on Earth the Seekers had gained new status. Never before had an occupation gone so
awry. Never before had it turned into a fierce and bloody battle. Never before had the lives of so
many souls been sacrificed. The Seekers stood as a mighty shield, and the souls of this world
were thrice-over indebted to them: for the safety they had carved out of the mayhem, for the risk
of the final death that they faced willingly every day, and for the new bodies they continued to
provide.
Now that the danger was virtually past, it appeared the gratitude was fading. And, for this
Seeker at least, the change was not a pleasant one.
It was easy to imagine what her questions for me would be. Though the Healer was trying to
buy me time to adjust to my new body, I knew I would do my best to help the Seeker. Good
citizenship was quintessential to every soul.
So I took a deep breath to prepare myself. The monitor registered the movement. I knew I was
stalling a bit. I hated to admit it, but I was afraid. To get the information the Seeker needed, I
would have to explore the violent memories that had made me scream in horror. More than that,
I was afraid of the voice I'd heard so loudly in my head. But she was silent now, as was right.
She was just a memory, too.
I should not have been afraid. After all, I was called Wanderer now. And I'd earned the name.
With another deep breath, I delved into the memories that frightened me, faced them head-on
with my teeth locked together.
I could skip past the end–it didn't overwhelm me now. In fast-forward, I ran through the dark
again, wincing, trying not to feel. It was over quickly.
Once I was through that barrier, it wasn't hard to float through less-alarming things and places, 
skimming for the information I wanted. I saw how she'd come to this cold city, driving by night
in a stolen car chosen for its nondescript appearance. She'd walked through the streets of
Chicago in darkness, shivering beneath her coat.
She was doing her own seeking. There were others like her here, or so she hoped. One in
particular. A friend… no, family. Not a sister… a cousin.
The words came slower and slower, and at first I did not understand why. Was this forgotten?
Lost in the trauma of an almost death? Was I still sluggish from unconsciousness? I struggled to
think clearly. This sensation was unfamiliar. Was my body still sedated? I felt alert enough, but
my mind labored unsuccessfully for the answers I wanted.
I tried another avenue of searching, hoping for clearer responses. What was her goal? She
would find… Sharon–I fished out the name–and they would…
I hit a wall.
It was a blank, a nothing. I tried to circle around it, but I couldn't find the edges of the void. It
was as if the information I sought had been erased.
As if this brain had been damaged.
Anger flashed through me, hot and wild. I gasped in surprise at the unexpected reaction. I'd
heard of the emotional instability of these human bodies, but this was beyond my ability to
anticipate. In eight full lives, I'd never had an emotion touch me with such force.
I felt the blood pulse through my neck, pounding behind my ears. My hands tightened into fists.
The machines beside me reported the acceleration of my heartbeats. There was a reaction in the
room: the sharp tap of the Seeker's shoes approached me, mingled with a quieter shuffle that
must have been the Healer.
“Welcome to Earth, Wanderer,” the female voice said.
CHAPTER 3
Resisted
She won't recognize the new name,” the Healer murmured.
A new sensation distracted me. Something pleasant, a change in the air as the Seeker stood at
my side. A scent, I realized. Something different than the sterile, odorless room. Perfume, my
new mind told me. Floral, lush…
“Can you hear me?” the Seeker asked, interrupting my analysis. “Are you aware?”
“Take your time,” the Healer urged in a softer voice than the one he had used before.
I did not open my eyes. I didn't want to be distracted. My mind gave me the words I needed,
and the tone that would convey what I couldn't say without using many words.
“Have I been placed in a damaged host in order to gain the information you need, Seeker?”
There was a gasp–surprise and outrage mingled–and something warm touched my skin, covered
my hand.
“Of course not, Wanderer,” the man said reassuringly. “Even a Seeker would stop at some
things.”
The Seeker gasped again. Hissed, my memory corrected.
“Then why doesn't this mind function correctly?”
There was a pause.
“The scans were perfect,” the Seeker said. Her words not reassuring but argumentative. Did
she mean to quarrel with me? “The body was entirely healed.”
“From a suicide attempt that was perilously close to succeeding.” My tone was stiff, still angry.
I wasn't used to anger. It was hard to contain it.
“Everything was in perfect order –”
The Healer cut her off. “What is missing?” he asked. “Clearly, you've accessed speech.”
“Memory. I was trying to find what the Seeker wants.”
Though there was no sound, there was a change. The atmosphere, which had gone tense at my
accusation, relaxed. I wondered how I knew this. I had a strange sensation that I was somehow
receiving more than my five senses were giving me–almost a feeling that there wasanother
sense, on the fringes, not quite harnessed. Intuition? That was almost the right word. As if any
creature needed more than five senses.
The Seeker cleared her throat, but it was the Healer who answered.
“Ah,” he said. “Don't make yourself anxious about some partial memory… difficulties. That's,
well, not to beexpected, exactly, but not surprising, considering.”
“I don't understand your meaning.”
“This host was part of the human resistance.” There was a hint of excitement in the Seeker's
voice now. “Those humans who were aware of us before insertion are more difficult to subdue.
This one still resists.”
There was a moment of silence while they waited for my response.
Resisting? The host was blocking my access? Again, the heat of my anger surprised me.
“Am I correctly bound?” I asked, my voice distorted because it came through my teeth.
“Yes,” the Healer said. “All eight hundred twenty-seven points are latched securely in the
optimum positions.”
This mind used more of my faculties than any host before, leaving me only one hundred
eighty-one spare attachments. Perhaps the numerous bindings were the reason the emotions
were so vivid.
I decided to open my eyes. I felt the need to double-check the Healer's promises and make sure
the rest of me worked.
Light. Bright, painful. I closed my eyes again. The last light I had seen had been filtered
through a hundred ocean fathoms. But these eyes had seen brighter and could handle it. I
opened them narrowly, keeping my eyelashes feathered over the breach.
“Would you like me to turn down the lights?”
“No, Healer. My eyes will adjust.”
“Very good,” he said, and I understood that his approval was meant for my casual use of the
possessive.
Both waited quietly while my eyes slowly widened.
My mind recognized this as an average room in a medical facility. A hospital. The ceiling tiles
were white with darker speckles. The lights were rectangular and the same size as the tiles,
replacing them at regular intervals. The walls were light green–a calming color, but also the
color of sickness. A poor choice, in my quickly formed opinion.
The people facing me were more interesting than the room. The worddoctor sounded in my
mind as soon as my eyes fastened on the Healer. He wore loose-fitting blue green clothes that
left his arms bare. Scrubs. He had hair on his face, a strange color that my memory called red.
Red! It had been three worlds since I had seen the color or any of its relatives. Even this gingery
gold filled me with nostalgia.
His face was generically human to me, but the knowledge in my memory applied the wordkind.
An impatient breath pulled my attention to the Seeker.
She was very small. If she had remained still, it would have taken me longer to notice her there
beside the Healer. She didn't draw the eye, a darkness in the bright room. She wore black from
chin to wrists–a conservative suit with a silk turtleneck underneath. Her hair was black, too. It
grew to her chin and was pushed back behind her ears. Her skin was darker than the Healer's.
Olive toned.
The tiny changes in humans' expressions were so minimal they were very hard to read. My
memory could name the look on this woman's face, though. The black brows, slanted down
over the slightly bulging eyes, created a familiar design. Not quite anger. Intensity. Irritation.
“How often does this happen?” I asked, looking at the Healer again.
“Not often,” the Healer admitted. “We have so few full-grown hosts available anymore. The
immature hosts are entirely pliable. But you indicated that you preferred to begin as an adult.…”
“Yes.”
“Most requests are the opposite. The human life span is much shorter than you're used to.”
“I'm well versed in all the facts, Healer. Have you dealt with this… resistance before yourself?”
“Only once, myself.”
“Tell me the facts of the case.” I paused. “Please,” I added, feeling a lack of courtesy in my
command.
The Healer sighed.
The Seeker began tapping her fingers against her arm. A sign of impatience. She did not care to
wait for what she wanted.
“This occurred four years ago,” the Healer began. “The soul involved had requested an adult
male host. The first one to be available was a human who had been living in a pocket of
resistance since the early years of the occupation. The human… knew what would happen when
he was caught.”
“Just as my host did.”
“Um, yes.” He cleared his throat. “This was only the soul's second life. He came from Blind
World.”
“Blind World?” I asked, cocking my head to the side reflexively.
“Oh, sorry, you wouldn't know our nicknames. This was one of yours, though, was it not?” He
pulled a device from his pocket, a computer, and scanned quickly. “Yes, your seventh planet. In
the eighty-first sector.”
“BlindWorld?” I said again, my voice now disapproving.
“Yes, well, some who have lived there prefer to call it the Singing World.”
I nodded slowly. I liked that better.
“And some who've never been there call it Planet of the Bats,” the Seeker muttered.
I turned my eyes to her, feeling them narrow as my mind dredged up the appropriate image of
the ugly flying rodent she referred to.
“I assume you are one who has never lived there, Seeker,” the Healer said lightly. “We called
this soul Racing Song at first–it was a loose translation of his name on… the Singing World.
But he soon opted to take the name of his host, Kevin. Though he was slated for a Calling in
Musical Performance, given his background, he said he felt more comfortable continuing in the
host's previous line of work, which was mechanical.
“These signs were somewhat worrisome to his assigned Comforter, but they were well within
normal bounds.
“Then Kevin started to complain that he was blacking out for periods of time. They brought
him back to me, and we ran extensive tests to make sure there was no hidden flaw in the host's
brain. During the testing, several Healers noted marked differences in his behavior and
personality. When we questioned him about this, he claimed to have no memory of certain
statements and actions. We continued to observe him, along with his Comforter, and eventually
discovered that the host was periodically taking control of Kevin's body.”
“Taking control?” My eyes strained wide. “With the soul unaware? The host took the body
back?”
“Sadly, yes. Kevin was not strong enough to suppress this host.”
Not strong enough.
Would they think me weak as well?Was I weak, that I could not force this mind to answer my
questions? Weaker still, because her living thoughts had existed in my head where there should
be nothing but memory? I'd always thought of myself as strong. This idea of weakness made me
flinch. Made me feel shame.
The Healer continued. “Certain events occurred, and it was decided –”
“What events?”
The Healer looked down without answering.
“What events?”I demanded again. “I believe I have a right to know.”
The Healer sighed. “You do. Kevin… physically attacked a Healer while not… himself.” He
winced. “He knocked the Healer unconscious with a blow from his fist and then found a scalpel
on her person. We found him insensible. The host had tried to cut the soul out of his body.”
It took me a moment before I could speak. Even then, my voice was just a breath. “What
happened to them?”
“Luckily, the host was unable to stay conscious long enough to inflict real damage. Kevin was
relocated, into an immature host this time. The troublesome host was in poor repair, and it was
decided there wasn't much point in saving him.
“Kevin is seven human years old now and perfectly normal… aside from the fact that he kept
the name Kevin, that is. His guardians are taking great care that he is heavily exposed to music,
and that is coming along well.…” The last was added as if it were good news–news that could
somehow cancel out the rest.
“Why?” I cleared my throat so that my voice could gain some volume. “Why have these risks
not been shared?”
“Actually,” the Seeker broke in, “it is very clearly stated in all recruitment propaganda that
assimilating the remaining adult human hosts is much more challenging than assimilating a
child. An immature host is highly recommended.”
“The wordchallenging does not quite cover Kevin's story,” I whispered.
“Yes, well, you preferred to ignore the recommendation.” She held up her hands in a
peacemaking gesture when my body tensed, causing the stiff fabric on the narrow bed to crackle
softly. “Not that I blame you. Childhood is extraordinarily tedious. And you are clearly not the
average soul. I have every confidence that this is well within your abilities to handle. This is just
another host. I'm sure you will have full access and control shortly.”
By this point in my observations of the Seeker, I was surprised that she'd had the patience to
wait for any delay, even my personal acclimatization. I sensed her disappointment in my lack of
information, and it brought back some of the unfamiliar feelings of anger.
“Did it not occur to you that you could get the answers you seek by being inserted into this
body yourself?” I asked.
She stiffened. “I'm no skipper.”
My eyebrows pulled up automatically.
“Another nickname,” the Healer explained. “For those who do not complete a life term in their
host.”
I nodded in understanding. We'd had a name for it on my other worlds. On no world was it
smiled upon. So I quit quizzing the Seeker and gave her what I could.
“Her name was Melanie Stryder. She was born in Albuquerque, New Mexico. She was in Los
Angeles when the occupation became known to her, and she hid in the wilderness for a few
years before finding… Hmmm. Sorry, I'll try that one again later. The body has seen twenty
years. She drove to Chicago from…” I shook my head. “There were several stages, not all of
them alone. The vehicle was stolen. She was searching for a cousin named Sharon, whom she
had reason to hope was still human. She neither found nor contacted anyone before she was
spotted. But…” I struggled, fighting against another blank wall. “I think… I can't be sure… I
think she left a note… somewhere.”
“So she expected someone would look for her?” the Seeker asked eagerly.
“Yes. She will be… missed. If she does not rendezvous with…” I gritted my teeth, truly
fighting now. The wall was black, and I could not tell how thick it was. I battered against it,
sweat beading on my forehead. The Seeker and the Healer were very quiet, allowing me to
concentrate.
I tried thinking of something else–the loud, unfamiliar noises the engine of the car had made,
the jittery rush of adrenaline every time the lights of another vehicle drew near on the road. I
already had this, and nothing fought me. I let the memory carry me along, let it skip over the
cold hike through the city under the sheltering darkness of night, let it wind its way to the
building where they'd found me.
Not me,her. My body shuddered.
“Don't overextend –” the Healer began.
The Seeker shushed him.
I let my mind dwell on the horror of discovery, the burning hatred of the Seekers that
overpowered almost everything else. The hatred was evil; it was pain. I could hardly bear to feel
it. But I let it run its course, hoping it would distract the resistance, weaken the defenses.
I watched carefully as she tried to hide and then knew she could not. A note, scratched on a
piece of debris with a broken pencil. Shoved hastily under a door. Not just any door.
“The pattern is the fifth door along the fifth hall on the fifth floor. Her communication is there.”
The Seeker had a small phone in her hand; she murmured rapidly into it.
“The building was supposed to be safe,” I continued. “They knew it was condemned. She
doesn't know how she was discovered. Did they find Sharon?”
A chill of horror raised goose bumps on my arms.
The question was not mine.
The question wasn't mine, but it flowed naturally through my lips as if it were. The Seeker did
not notice anything amiss.
“The cousin? No, they found no other human,” she answered, and my body relaxed in response.
“This host was spotted entering the building. Since the building was known to be condemned,
the citizen who observed her was concerned. He called us, and we watched the building to see
if we could catch more than one, and then moved in when that seemed unlikely. Can you find
the rendezvous point?”
I tried.
So many memories, all of them so colorful and sharp. I saw a hundred places I'd never been,
heard their names for the first time. A house in Los Angeles, lined with tall fronded trees. A
meadow in a forest, with a tent and a fire, outside Winslow, Arizona. A deserted rocky beach in
Mexico. A cave, the entrance guarded by sheeting rain, somewhere in Oregon. Tents, huts, rude
shelters. As time went on, the names grew less specific. She did not know where she was, nor
did she care.
My name was now Wanderer, yet her memories fit it just as well as my own. Except that my
wandering was by choice. These flashes of memory were always tinged with the fear of the
hunted. Not wandering, but running.
I tried not to feel pity. Instead, I worked to focus the memories. I didn't need to see where she'd
been, only where she was going. I sorted through the pictures that tied to the wordChicago, but
none seemed to be anything more than random images. I widened my net. What was outside 
Chicago? Cold, I thought. It was cold, and there was some worry about that.
Where? I pushed, and the wall came back.
I exhaled in a gust. “Outside the city–in the wilderness… a state park, away from any
habitations. It's not somewhere she'd been before, but she knew how to get there.”
“How soon?” the Seeker asked.
“Soon.” The answer came automatically. “How long have I been here?”
“We let the host heal for nine days, just to be absolutely sure she was recovered,” the Healer
told me. “Insertion was today, the tenth day.”
Ten days. My body felt a staggering wave of relief.
“Too late,” I said. “For the rendezvous point… or even the note.” I could feel the host's
reaction to this–could feel it much too strongly. The host was almost…smug. I allowed the
words she thought to be spoken, so that I could learn from them. “He won't be there.”
“He?” The Seeker pounced on the pronoun. “Who?”
The black wall slammed down with more force than she'd used before. She was the tiniest
fraction of a second too late.
Again, the face filled my mind. The beautiful face with the golden tan skin and the light-flecked
eyes. The face that stirred a strange, deep pleasure within me while I viewed it so clearly in my
mind.
Though the wall slapped into place with an accompanying sensation of vicious resentment, it
was not fast enough.
“Jared,” I answered. As quickly as if it had come from me, the thought that was not mine
followed the name through my lips. “Jared is safe.”
CHAPTER 4
Dreamed
It is too dark to be so hot, or maybe too hot to be so dark. One of the two is out of place.
I crouch in the darkness behind the weak protection of a scrubby creosote bush, sweating out
all the water left in my body. It's been fifteen minutes since the car left the garage. No lights
have come on. The arcadia door is open two inches, letting the swamp cooler do its job. I can 
imagine the feel of the moist, cool air blowing through the screen. I wish it could reach me here.
My stomach gurgles, and I clench my abdominal muscles to stifle the sound. It is quiet enough
that the murmur carries.
I am so hungry.
There is another need that is stronger–another hungry stomach hidden safely far away in the
darkness, waiting alone in the rough cave that is our temporary home. A cramped place, jagged
with volcanic rock. What will he do if I don't come back? All the pressure of motherhood with
none of the knowledge or experience. I feel so hideously helpless. Jamie is hungry.
There are no other houses close to this one. I've been watching since the sun was still white hot
in the sky, and I don't think there is a dog, either.
I ease up from my crouch, my calves screaming in protest, but keep hunched at the waist, trying
to be smaller than the bush. The way up the wash is smooth sand, a pale pathway in the light of
the stars. There are no sounds of cars on the road.
I know what they will realize when they return, the monsters who look like a nice couple in
their early fifties. They will know exactly what I am, and the search will begin at once. I need to
be far away. I really hope they are going out for a night on the town. I think it's Friday. They
keep our habits so perfectly, it's hard to see any difference. Which is how they won in the first
place.
The fence around the yard is only waist high. I get over easily, noiselessly. The yard is gravel,
though, and I have to walk carefully to keep my weight from shifting it. I make it to the patio
slab.
The blinds are open. The starlight is enough to see that the rooms are empty of movement. This
couple goes for a spartan look, and I'm grateful. It makes it harder for someone to hide. Of
course, that leaves no place for me to hide, either, but if it comes to hiding for me, it's too late
anyway.
I ease the screen door open first, and then the glass door. Both glide silently. I place my feet
carefully on the tile, but this is just out of habit. No one is waiting for me here.
The cool air feels like heaven.
The kitchen is to my left. I can see the gleam of granite counters.
I pull the canvas bag from my shoulder and start with the refrigerator. There is a moment of
anxiety as the light comes on when the door opens, but I find the button and hold it down with
my toe. My eyes are blind. I don't have time to let them adjust. I go by feel.
Milk, cheese slices, leftovers in a plastic bowl. I hope it's the chicken-and-rice thing I watched
him cooking for dinner. We'll eat this tonight.
Juice, a bag of apples. Baby carrots. These will stay good till morning.
I hurry to the pantry. I need things that will keep longer.
I can see better as I gather as much as I can carry. Mmm, chocolate chip cookies. I'm dying to
open the bag right now, but I grit my teeth and ignore the twist of my empty stomach.
The bag gets heavy too quickly. This will last us only a week, even if we're careful with it. And
I don't feel like being careful; I feel like gorging. I shove granola bars into my pockets.
One more thing. I hurry to the sink and refill my canteen. Then I put my head under the flow
and gulp straight from the stream. The water makes odd noises when it hits my hollow stomach.
I start to feel panicked now that my job is done. I want to be out of here. Civilization is deadly.
I watch the floor on my way out, worried about tripping with my heavy bag, which is why I
don't see the silhouetted black figure on the patio until my hand is on the door.
I hear his mumbled oath at the same time that a stupid squeak of fear escapes my mouth. I spin
to sprint for the front door, hoping the locks are not latched, or at least not difficult.
I don't even get two steps before rough, hard hands grab my shoulders and wrench me back
against his body. Too big, too strong to be a woman. The bass voice proves me right.
“One sound and you die,” he threatens gruffly. I am shocked to feel a thin, sharp edge pushing
into the skin under my jaw.
I don't understand. I shouldn't be given a choice. Who is this monster? I've never heard of one
who would break rules. I answer the only way I can.
“Do it,” I spit through my teeth. “Just do it. I don't want to be a filthy parasite!”
I wait for the knife, and my heart is aching. Each beat has a name. Jamie, Jamie, Jamie. What
will happen to you now?
“Clever,” the man mutters, and it doesn't sound like he's speaking to me. “Must be a Seeker.
And that means a trap. How did they know?” The steel disappears from my throat, only to be
replaced by a hand as hard as iron.
I can barely breathe under his grip.
“Where are the rest of them?” he demands, squeezing.
“It's just me!” I rasp. I can't lead him to Jamie. What will Jamie do when I don't come back?
Jamie is hungry!
I throw my elbow into his gut–and this really hurts. His stomach muscles are as iron hard as the
hand. Which is very strange. Muscles like that are the product of hard living or obsession, and
the parasites have neither.
He doesn't even suck in a breath at my blow. Desperate, I jab my heel into his instep. This
catches him off guard, and he wobbles. I wrench away, but he grabs hold of my bag, yanking me
back into his body. His hand clamps down on my throat again.
“Feisty for a peace-loving body snatcher, aren't you?”
His words are nonsensical. I thought the aliens were all the same. I guess they have their nut
jobs, too, after all.
I twist and claw, trying to break his hold. My nails catch his arm, but this just makes him
tighten his hold on my throat.
“Iwill kill you, you worthless body thief. I'm not bluffing.”
“Do it, then!”
Suddenly he gasps, and I wonder if any of my flailing limbs have made contact. I don't feel any
new bruises.
He lets go of my arm and grabs my hair. This must be it. He's going to cut my throat. I brace for
the slice of the knife.
But the hand on my throat eases up, and then his fingers are fumbling on the back of my neck,
rough and warm on my skin.
“Impossible,” he breathes.
Something hits the floor with a thud. He's dropped the knife? I try to think of a way to get it.
Maybe if I fall. The hand on my neck isn't tight enough to keep me from yanking free. I think I
heard where the blade landed.
He spins me around suddenly. There is a click, and light blinds my left eye. I gasp and
automatically try to twist away from it. His hand tightens in my hair. The light flickers to my
right eye.
“I can't believe it,” he whispers. “You're still human.”
His hands grab my face from both sides, and before I can pull free, his lips come down hard on
mine.
I'm frozen for half a second. No one has ever kissed me in my life. Not a real kiss. Just my
parents' pecks on the cheek or forehead, so many years ago. This is something I thought I would
never feel. I'm not sure exactly what it feels like, though. There's too much panic, too much
terror, too much adrenaline.
I jerk my knee up in a sharp thrust.
He chokes out a wheezing sound, and I'm free. Instead of running for the front of the house
again like he expects, I duck under his arm and leap through the open door. I think I can outrun
him, even with my load. I've got a head start, and he's still making pained noises. I know where
I'm going–I won't leave a path he can see in the dark. I never dropped the food, and that's good.
I think the granola bars are a loss, though.
“Wait!” he yells.
Shut up,I think, but I don't yell back.
He's running after me. I can hear his voice getting closer. “I'm not one of them!”
Sure.I keep my eyes on the sand and sprint. My dad used to say I ran like a cheetah. I was the
fastest on my track team, state champion, back before the end of the world.
“Listen to me!” He's still yelling at full volume. “Look! I'll prove it. Just stop and look at me!”
Not likely.I pivot off the wash and flit through the mesquites.
“I didn't think there was anyone left! Please, I need to talk to you!”
His voice surprises me–it is too close.
“I'm sorry I kissed you! That was stupid! I've just been alone so long!”
“Shutup!” I don't say it loudly, but I know he hears. He's getting even closer. I've never been
outrun before. I push my legs harder.
There's a low grunt to his breathing as he speeds up, too.
Something big flies into my back, and I go down. I taste dirt in my mouth, and I'm pinned by 
something so heavy I can hardly breathe.
“Wait. A. Minute,” he huffs.
He shifts his weight and rolls me over. He straddles my chest, trapping my arms under his legs.
He is squishing my food. I growl and try to squirm out from under him.
“Look, look, look!” he says. He pulls a small cylinder from his hip pocket and twists the top. A
beam of light shoots out the end.
He turns the flashlight on his face.
The light makes his skin yellow. It shows prominent cheekbones beside a long thin nose and a
sharply squared-off jaw. His lips are stretched into a grin, but I can see that they are full, for a
man. His eyebrows and lashes are bleached out from sun.
But that's not what he is showing me.
His eyes, clear liquid sienna in the illumination, shine with no more than human reflection. He
bounces the light between left and right.
“See? See? I'm just like you.”
“Let me see your neck.” Suspicion is thick in my voice. I don't let myself believe that this is
more than a trick. I don't understand the point of the charade, but I'm sure there is one. There is
no hope anymore.
His lips twist. “Well… That won't exactly help anything. Aren't the eyes enough? You know
I'm not one of them.”
“Why won't you show me your neck?”
“Because I have a scar there,” he admits.
I try to squirm out from under him again, and his hand pins my shoulder.
“It's self-inflicted,” he explains. “I think I did a pretty good job, though it hurt like hell.I don't
have all that pretty hair to covermy neck. The scar helps me blend in.”
“Get off me.”
He hesitates, then gets to his feet in one easy move, not needing to use his hands. He holds one
out, palm up, to me.
“Please don't run away. And, um, I'd rather you didn't kick me again, either.”
I don't move. I know he can catch me if I try to run.
“Who are you?” I whisper.
He smiles wide. “My name is Jared Howe. I haven't spoken to another human being in more
than two years, so I'm sure I must seem… a little crazy to you. Please, forgive that and tell me
your name, anyway.”
“Melanie,” I whisper.
“Melanie,” he repeats. “I can't tell you how delighted I am to meet you.”
I grip my bag tightly, keeping my eyes on him. He reaches his hand down toward me slowly.
And I take it.
It isn't until I see my hand curl voluntarily around his that I realize I believe him.
He helps me to my feet and doesn't release my hand when I'm up.
“What now?” I ask guardedly.
“Well, we can't stay here for long. Will you come back with me to the house? I left my bag.
You beat me to the fridge.”
I shake my head.
He seems to realize how brittle I am, how close to breaking.
“Will you wait for me here, then?” he asks in a gentle voice. “I'll be very quick. Let me get us
some more food.”
“Us?”
“Do you really think I'm going to let you disappear? I'll follow you even if you tell me not to.”
I don't want to disappear from him.
“I…” How can I not trust another human completely? We're family–both part of the
brotherhood of extinction. “I don't have time. I have so far to go and… Jamie is waiting.”
“You're not alone,” he realizes. His expression shows uncertainty for the first time.
“My brother. He's just nine, and he's so frightened when I'm away. It will take me half the night
to get back to him. He won't know if I've been caught. He's sohungry. ” As if to make my point,
my stomach growls loudly.
Jared's smile is back, brighter than before. “Will it help if I give you a ride?”
“A ride?” I echo.
“I'll make you a deal. You wait here while I gather more food, and I'll take you anywhere you
want to go in my jeep. It's faster than running–even faster thanyou running.”
“You have a car?”
“Of course. Do you think I walked out here?”
I think of the six hours it took me to walk here, and my forehead furrows.
“We'll be back to your brother in no time,” he promises. “Don't move from this spot, okay?”
I nod.
“And eat something, please. I don't want your stomach to give us away.” He grins, and his eyes
crinkle up, fanning lines out of the corners. My heart gives one hard thump, and I know I will
wait here if it takes him all night.
He is still holding my hand. He lets go slowly, his eyes not leaving mine. He takes a step
backward, then pauses.
“Please don't kick me,” he pleads, leaning forward and grabbing my chin. He kisses me again,
and this time I feel it. His lips are softer than his hands, and hot, even in the warm desert night.
A flock of butterflies riots in my stomach and steals my breath. My hands reach for him
instinctively. I touch the warm skin of his cheek, the rough hair on his neck. My fingers skim
over a line of puckered skin, a raised ridge right beneath the hairline.
I scream.
I woke up covered in sweat. Even before I was all the way awake, my fingers were on the back
of my neck, tracing the short line left from the insertion. I could barely detect the faint pink
blemish with my fingertips. The medicines the Healer had used had done their job.
Jared's poorly healed scar had never been much of a disguise.
I flicked on the light beside my bed, waiting for my breathing to slow, veins full of adrenaline 
from the realistic dream.
A new dream, but in essence so much the same as the many others that had plagued me in the
past months.
No, not a dream. Surely a memory.
I could still feel the heat of Jared's lips on mine. My hands reached out without my permission,
searching across the rumpled sheet, looking for something they did not find. My heart ached
when they gave up, falling to the bed limp and empty.
I blinked away the unwelcome moisture in my eyes. I didn't know how much more of this I
could stand. How did anyone survive this world, with these bodies whose memories wouldn't
stay in the past where they should? With these emotions that were so strong I couldn't tell whatI
felt anymore?
I was going to be exhausted tomorrow, but I felt so far from sleep that I knew it would be
hours before I could relax. I might as well do my duty and get it over with. Maybe it would help
me take my mind off things I'd rather not think about.
I rolled off the bed and stumbled to the computer on the otherwise empty desk. It took a few
seconds for the screen to glow to life, and another few seconds to open my mail program. It
wasn't hard to find the Seeker's address; I only had four contacts: the Seeker, the Healer, my
new employer, and his wife, my Comforter.
There was another human with my host, Melanie Stryder.
I typed, not bothering with a greeting.
His name is Jamie Stryder; he is her brother.
For a panicked moment, I wondered at her control. All this time, and I'd never even guessed at
the boy's existence–not because he didn't matter to her, but because she protected him more
fiercely than other secrets I'd unraveled. Did she have more secrets this big, this important? So
sacred that she kept them even from my dreams? Was she that strong? My fingers trembled as I
keyed the rest of the information.
I think he's a young adolescent now. Perhaps thirteen. They were living in a temporary camp,
and I believe it was north of the town of Cave Creek, in Arizona. That was several years ago,
though. Still, you could compare a map to the lines I remembered before. As always, I'll tell you
if I get anything more.
I sent it off. As soon as it was gone, terror washed through me.
Not Jamie!
Her voice in my head was as clear as my own spoken aloud. I shuddered in horror.
Even as I struggled with the fear of what was happening, I was gripped with the insane desire
to e-mail the Seeker again and apologize for sending her my crazy dreams. To tell her I was half
asleep and to pay no attention to the silly message I'd sent.
The desire was not my own.
I shut off the computer.
I hate you,the voice snarled in my head.
“Then maybe you should leave,” I snapped. The sound of my voice, answering her aloud, made
me shudder again.
She hadn't spoken to me since the first moments I'd been here. There was no doubt that she
was getting stronger. Just like the dreams.
And there was no question about it; I was going to have to visit my Comforter tomorrow. Tears
of disappointment and humiliation welled in my eyes at the thought.
I went back to bed, put a pillow over my face, and tried to think of nothing at all.
CHAPTER 5
Uncomforted
Hello there, Wanderer! Won't you take a seat and make yourself at home?”
I hesitated on the threshold of the Comforter's office, one foot in and one foot out.
She smiled, just a tiny movement at the corners of her mouth. It was much easier to read facial
expressions now; the little muscle twitches and shifts had become familiar through months of
exposure. I could see that the Comforter found my reluctance a bit amusing. At the same time, I
could sense her frustration that I was still uneasy coming to her.
With a quiet sigh of resignation, I walked into the small brightly colored room and took my
usual seat–the puffy red one, the one farthest from where she sat.
Her lips pursed.
To avoid her gaze, I stared through the open windows at the clouds scuttling past the sun. The 
faint tang of ocean brine blew softly through the room.
“So, Wanderer. It's been a while since you've come to see me.”
I met her eyes guiltily. “I did leave a message about that last appointment. I had a student who
requested some of my time.…”
“Yes, I know.” She smiled the tiny smile again. “I got your message.”
She was attractive for an older woman, as humans went. She'd let her hair stay a natural gray–it
was soft, tending toward white rather than silver, and she wore it long, pulled back in a loose
ponytail. Her eyes were an interesting green color I'd never seen on anyone else.
“I'm sorry,” I said, since she seemed to be waiting for a response.
“That's all right. I understand. It's difficult for you to come here. You wish so much that it
wasn't necessary. It's never been necessary for you before. This frightens you.”
I stared down at the wooden floor. “Yes, Comforter.”
“I know I've asked you to call me Kathy.”
“Yes… Kathy.”
She laughed lightly. “You are not at ease with human names yet, are you, Wanderer?”
“No. To be honest, it seems… like a surrender.”
I looked up to see her nod slowly. “Well, I can understand why you, especially, would feel that
way.”
I swallowed loudly when she said that, and stared again at the floor.
“Let's talk about something easier for a moment,” Kathy suggested. “Do you continue to enjoy
your Calling?”
“I do.” Thiswas easier. “I've begun a new semester. I wondered if it would get tiresome,
repeating the same material, but so far it doesn't. Having new ears makes the stories new again.”
“I hear good things about you from Curt. He says your class is among the most requested at the
university.”
My cheeks warmed a bit at this praise. “That's nice to hear. How is your partner?”
“Curt is wonderful, thank you. Our hosts are in excellent shape for their ages. We have many
years ahead of us, I think.”
I was curious if she would stay on this world, if she would move to another human host when
the time came, or if she would leave. But I didn't want to ask any questions that might move us
into the more difficult areas of discussion.
“I enjoy teaching,” I said instead. “It's somewhat related to my Calling with the See Weeds, so
that makes it easier than something unfamiliar. I'm indebted to Curt for requesting me.”
“They're lucky to have you.” Kathy smiled warmly. “Do you know how rare it is for a Professor
of History to have experienced even two planets in the curriculum? Yet you've lived a term on
almost all of them. And the Origin, to boot! There isn't a school on this planet that wouldn't
love to steal you away from us. Curt plots ways to keep you busy so you have no time to
consider moving.”
“HonoraryProfessor,” I corrected her.
Kathy smiled and then took a deep breath, her smile fading. “You haven't been to see me in so
long, I was wondering if your problems were resolving themselves. But then it occurred to me
that perhaps the reason for your absence was that they were getting worse.”
I stared down at my hands and said nothing.
My hands were light brown–a tan that never faded whether I spent time in the sun or not. One
dark freckle marked the skin just above my left wrist. My nails were cut short. I disliked the
feeling of long nails. They were unpleasant when they brushed the skin wrong. And my fingers
were so long and thin–the added length of fingernails made them look strange. Even for a
human.
She cleared her throat after a minute. “I'm guessing my intuition was right.”
“Kathy.” I said her name slowly. Stalling. “Why did you keep your human name? Did it make
you feel… more at one? With your host, I mean?” I would have liked to know about Curt's
choice as well, but it was such a personal question. It would have been wrong to ask anyone
besides Curt for the answer, even his partner. I worried that I'd already been too impolite, but
she laughed.
“Heavens, no, Wanderer. Haven't I told you this? Hmm. Maybe not, since it's not my job to
talk, but to listen. Most of the souls I speak with don't need as much encouragement as you do.
Did you know I came to Earth in one of the very first placements, before the humans had any
idea we were here? I had human neighbors on both sides. Curt and I had to pretend to be our
hosts for several years. Even after we'd settled the immediate area, you never knew when a
human might be near. SoKathy just became who I was. Besides, the translation of my former 
name was fourteen words long and did not shorten prettily.” She grinned. The sunlight slanting
through the window caught her eyes and sent their silver green reflection dancing on the wall.
For a moment, the emerald irises glowed iridescent.
I'd had no idea that this soft, cozy woman had been a part of the front line. It took me a minute
to process that. I stared at her, surprised and suddenly more respectful. I'd never taken
Comforters very seriously–never had a need before now. They were for those who struggled, for
the weak, and it shamed me to be here. Knowing Kathy's history made me feel slightly less
awkward with her. She understood strength.
“Did it bother you?” I asked. “Pretending to be one of them?”
“No, not really. You see, this host was a lot to get used to–there was so much that was new.
Sensory overload. Following the set pattern was quite as much as I could handle at first.”
“And Curt… You chose to stay with your host's spouse? After it was over?”
This question was more pointed, and Kathy grasped that at once. She shifted in her seat, pulling
her legs up and folding them under her. She gazed thoughtfully at a spot just over my head as
she answered.
“Yes, I chose Curt–and he chose me. At first, of course, it was random chance, an assignment.
We bonded, naturally, from spending so much time together, sharing the danger of our mission.
As the university's president, Curt had many contacts, you see. Our house was an insertion
facility. We would entertain often. Humans would come through our door and our kind would
leave. It all had to be very quick and quiet–you know the violence these hosts are prone to. We
lived every day with the knowledge that we could meet a final end at any moment. There was
constant excitement and frequent fear.
“All very good reasons why Curt and I might have formed an attachment and decided to stay
together when secrecy was no longer necessary. And I could lie to you, assuage your fears, by
telling you that these were the reasons. But…” She shook her head and then seemed to settle
deeper into her chair, her eyes boring into me. “In so many millennia, the humans never did
figurelove out. How much is physical, how much in the mind? How much accident and how
much fate? Why did perfect matches crumble and impossible couples thrive? I don't know the
answers any better than they did. Love simply is where it is. My host loved Curt's host, and that
love did not die when the ownership of the minds changed.”
She watched me carefully, reacting with a slight frown when I slumped in my seat.
“Melanie still grieves for Jared,” she stated.
I felt my head nod without willing the action.
“Yougrieve for him.”
I closed my eyes.
“The dreams continue?”
“Every night,” I mumbled.
“Tell me about them.” Her voice was soft, persuasive.
“I don't like to think about them.”
“I know. Try. It might help.”
“How? How will it help to tell you that I see his face every time I close my eyes? That I wake
up and cry when he's not there? That the memories are so strong I can't separate hers from mine
anymore?”
I stopped abruptly, clenching my teeth.
Kathy pulled a white handkerchief from her pocket and offered it to me. When I didn't move,
she got up, walked over to me, and dropped it in my lap. She sat on the arm of my chair and
waited.
I held on stubbornly for half a minute. Then I snatched the little square of fabric angrily and
wiped my eyes.
“I hate this.”
“Everybody cries their first year. These emotions are so impossible. We're all children for a bit,
whether we intended that or not. I used to tear up every time I saw a pretty sunset. The taste of
peanut butter would sometimes do that, too.” She patted the top of my head, then trailed her
fingers gently through the lock of hair I always kept tucked behind my ear.
“Such pretty, shiny hair,” she noted. “Every time I see you it's shorter. Why do you keep it that
way?”
Already in tears, I didn't feel like I had much dignity to defend. Why claim that it was easier to
care for, as I usually did? After all, I'd come here to confess and get help–I might as well get on
with it.
“It bothersher. She likes it long.”
She didn't gasp, as I half expected she would. Kathy was good at her job. Her response was 