AN ancient English Cathedral Tower? How can the ancient English Cathedral tower be here!
The well-known massive gray square tower of its old Cathedral? How can that be here! There is
no spike of rusty iron in the air, between the eye and it, from any point of the real prospect. What
is the spike that intervenes, and who has set it up? Maybe it is set up by the Sultan's orders for the
impaling of a horde of Turkish robbers, one by one. It is so, for cymbals clash, and the Sultan
goes by to his palace in long procession. Ten thousand scimitars flash in the sunlight, and thrice
ten thousand dancing-girls strew flowers. Then, follow white elephants caparisoned in countless
gorgeous colours, and infinite in number and attendants. Still the Cathedral Tower rises in the
background, where it cannot be, and still no writhing figure is on the grim spike. Stay! Is the
spike so low a thing as the rusty spike on the top of a post of an old bedstead that has tumbled all
awry? Some vague period of drowsy laughter must be devoted to the consideration of this
possibility.
Shaking from head to foot, the man whose scattered consciousness has thus fantastically pieced
itself together, at length rises, supports his trembling frame upon his arms, and looks around. He
is in the meanest and closest of small rooms. Through the ragged window-curtain, the light of
early day steals in from a miserable court. He lies, dressed, across a large unseemly bed, upon a
bedstead that has indeed given way under the weight upon it. Lying, also dressed and also across
the bed, not longwise, are a Chinaman, a Lascar, and a haggard woman. The two first are in a
sleep or stupor; the last is blowing at a kind of pipe, to kindle it. And as she blows, and shading it
with her lean hand, concentrates its red spark of light, it serves in the dim morning as a lamp to
show him what he sees of her.
'Another?' says this woman, in a querulous, rattling whisper. 'Have another?'
He looks about him, with his hand to his forehead.'Ye've smoked as many as five since ye come in at midnight,' the woman goes on, as she
chronically complains. 'Poor me, poor me, my head is so bad. Them two come in after ye. Ah,
poor me, the business is slack, is slack! Few Chinamen about the Docks, and fewer Lascars, and
no ships coming in, these say! Here's another ready for ye, deary. Ye'll remember like a good
soul, won't ye, that the market price is dreffle high just now? More nor three shillings and
sixpence for a thimbleful! And ye'll remember that nobody but me (and Jack Chinaman t'other
side the court; but he can't do it as well as me) has the true secret of mixing it? Ye'll pay up
accordingly, deary, won't ye?'
She blows at the pipe as she speaks, and, occasionally bubbling at it, inhales much of its contents.
'O me, O me, my lungs is weak, my lungs is bad! It's nearly ready for ye, deary. Ah, poor me,
poor me, my poor hand shakes like to drop off! I see ye coming-to, and I ses to my poor self, "I'll
have another ready for him, and he'll bear in mind the market price of opium, and pay according."
O my poor head! I makes my pipes of old penny ink-bottles, ye see, deary - this is one - and I
fits-in a mouthpiece, this way, and I takes my mixter out of this thimble with this little horn spoon;
and so I fills, deary. Ah, my poor nerves! I got Heavens-hard drunk for sixteen year afore I took
to this; but this don't hurt me, not to speak of. And it takes away the hunger as well as wittles,
deary.'
She hands him the nearly-emptied pipe, and sinks back, turning over on her face.
He rises unsteadily from the bed, lays the pipe upon the hearthstone, draws back the ragged curtain, and looks with repugnance at his three companions. He
notices that the woman has opium-smoked herself into a strange likeness of the Chinaman. His
form of cheek, eye, and temple, and his colour, are repeated in her. Said Chinaman convulsively
wrestles with one of his many Gods or Devils, perhaps, and snarls horribly. The Lascar laughs
and dribbles at the mouth. The hostess is still.
'What visions can SHE have?' the waking man muses, as he turns her face towards him, and stands
looking down at it. 'Visions of many butchers' shops, and public-houses, and much credit? Of
an increase of hideous customers, and this horrible bedstead set upright again, and this horrible
court swept clean? What can she rise to, under any quantity of opium, higher than that! - Eh?'He bends down his ear, to listen to her mutterings.
'Unintelligible!'
As he watches the spasmodic shoots and darts that break out of her face and limbs, like fitful
lightning out of a dark sky, some contagion in them seizes upon him: insomuch that he has to
withdraw himself to a lean arm-chair by the hearth - placed there, perhaps, for such emergencies -
and to sit in it, holding tight, until he has got the better of this unclean spirit of imitation.
Then he comes back, pounces on the Chinaman, and seizing him with both hands by the throat,
turns him violently on the bed. The Chinaman clutches the aggressive hands, resists, gasps, and
protests.
'What do you say?'
A watchful pause.
'Unintelligible!'
Slowly loosening his grasp as he listens to the incoherent jargon with an attentive frown, he turns to
the Lascar and fairly drags him forth upon the floor. As he falls, the Lascar starts into a half-risen
attitude, glares with his eyes, lashes about him fiercely with his arms, and draws a phantom knife.
It then becomes apparent that the woman has taken possession of this knife, for safety's sake; for,
she too starting up, and restraining and expostulating with him, the knife is visible in her dress, not
in his, when they drowsily drop back, side by side.
There has been chattering and clattering enough between them, but to no purpose. When any
distinct word has been flung into the air, it has had no sense or sequence. Wherefore
'unintelligible!' is again the comment of the watcher, made with some reassured nodding of his head,
and a gloomy smile. He then lays certain silver money on the table, finds his hat, gropes his way
down the broken stairs, gives a good morning to some rat-ridden doorkeeper, in bed in a black
hutch beneath the stairs, and passes out.
That same afternoon, the massive gray square tower of an old Cathedral rises before the sight of a
jaded traveller. The bells are going for daily vesper service, and he must needs attend it, one
would say, from his haste to reach the open Cathedral door. The choir are getting on their sulliedwhite robes, in a hurry, when he arrives among them, gets on his own robe, and falls into the
procession filing in to service. Then, the Sacristan locks the iron-barred gates that divide the
sanctuary from the chancel, and all of the procession having scuttled into their places, hide their
faces; and then the intoned words, 'WHEN THE WICKED MAN - ' rise among groins of arches
and beams of roof, awakening muttered thunder.
CHAPTER II - A DEAN, AND A CHAPTER ALSO
WHOSOEVER has observed that sedate and clerical bird, the rook, may perhaps have noticed that
when he wings his way homeward towards nightfall, in a sedate and clerical company, two rooks
will suddenly detach themselves from the rest, will retrace their flight for some distance, and will
there poise and linger; conveying to mere men the fancy that it is of some occult importance to the
body politic, that this artful couple should pretend to have renounced connection with it.
Similarly, service being over in the old Cathedral with the square tower, and the choir scuffling out
again, and divers venerable persons of rook-like aspect dispersing, two of these latter retrace their
steps, and walk together in the echoing Close.
Not only is the day waning, but the year. The low sun is fiery and yet cold behind the monastery
ruin, and the Virginia creeper on the Cathedral wall has showered half its deep-red leaves down on
the pavement. There has been rain this afternoon, and a wintry shudder goes among the little
pools on the cracked, uneven flag-stones, and through the giant elm-trees as they shed a gust of
tears. Their fallen leaves lie strewn thickly about. Some of these leaves, in a timid rush, seek
sanctuary within the low arched Cathedral door; but two men coming out resist them, and cast them
forth again with their feet; this done, one of the two locks the door with a goodly key, and the other
flits away with a folio music-book.
'Mr. Jasper was that, Tope?'
'Yes, Mr. Dean.'
'He has stayed late.''Yes, Mr. Dean. I have stayed for him, your Reverence. He has been took a little poorly.'
'Say "taken," Tope - to the Dean,' the younger rook interposes in a low tone with this touch of
correction, as who should say: 'You may offer bad grammar to the laity, or the humbler clergy, not
to the Dean.'
Mr. Tope, Chief Verger and Showman, and accustomed to be high with excursion parties, declines
with a silent loftiness to perceive that any suggestion has been tendered to him.
'And when and how has Mr. Jasper been taken - for, as Mr. Crisparkle has remarked, it is better to
say taken - taken - ' repeats the Dean; 'when and how has Mr. Jasper been Taken - '
'Taken, sir,' Tope deferentially murmurs.
' - Poorly, Tope?'
'Why, sir, Mr. Jasper was that breathed - '
'I wouldn't say "That breathed," Tope,' Mr. Crisparkle interposes with the same touch as before.
'Not English - to the Dean.'
'Breathed to that extent,' the Dean (not unflattered by this indirect homage) condescendingly
remarks, 'would be preferable.'
'Mr. Jasper's breathing was so remarkably short' - thus discreetly does Mr. Tope work his way round
the sunken rock - 'when he came in, that it distressed him mightily to get his notes out: which was
perhaps the cause of his having a kind of fit on him after a little. His memory grew DAZED.'
Mr. Tope, with his eyes on the Reverend Mr. Crisparkle, shoots this word out, as defying him to
improve upon it: 'and a dimness and giddiness crept over him as strange as ever I saw: though
he didn't seem to mind it particularly, himself. However, a little time and a little water brought
him out of his DAZE.' Mr. Tope repeats the word and its emphasis, with the air of saying: 'As I
HAVE made a success, I'll make it again.'
'And Mr. Jasper has gone home quite himself, has he?' asked the Dean.
'Your Reverence, he has gone home quite himself. And I'm glad to see he's having his fire kindledup, for it's chilly after the wet, and the Cathedral had both a damp feel and a damp touch this
afternoon, and he was very shivery.'
They all three look towards an old stone gatehouse crossing the Close, with an arched thoroughfare
passing beneath it. Through its latticed window, a fire shines out upon the fast-darkening scene,
involving in shadow the pendent masses of ivy and creeper covering the building's front. As the
deep Cathedral-bell strikes the hour, a ripple of wind goes through these at their distance, like a
ripple of the solemn sound that hums through tomb and tower, broken niche and defaced statue, in
the pile close at hand.
'Is Mr. Jasper's nephew with him?' the Dean asks.
'No, sir,' replied the Verger, 'but expected. There's his own solitary shadow betwixt his two
windows - the one looking this way, and the one looking down into the High Street - drawing his
own curtains now.'
'Well, well,' says the Dean, with a sprightly air of breaking up the little conference, 'I hope Mr.
Jasper's heart may not be too much set upon his nephew. Our affections, however laudable, in this
transitory world, should never master us; we should guide them, guide them. I find I am not
disagreeably reminded of my dinner, by hearing my dinner-bell. Perhaps, Mr. Crisparkle, you will,
before going home, look in on Jasper?'
'Certainly, Mr. Dean. And tell him that you had the kindness to desire to know how he was?'
'Ay; do so, do so. Certainly. Wished to know how he was. By all means. Wished to know
how he was.'
With a pleasant air of patronage, the Dean as nearly cocks his quaint hat as a Dean in good spirits
may, and directs his comely gaiters towards the ruddy dining-room of the snug old red-brick house
where he is at present, 'in residence' with Mrs. Dean and Miss Dean.
Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, fair and rosy, and perpetually pitching himself head-foremost into all
the deep running water in the surrounding country; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, early riser,
musical, classical, cheerful, kind, good-natured, social, contented, and boy-like; Mr. Crisparkle,
Minor Canon and good man, lately 'Coach' upon the chief Pagan high roads, but since promoted by
a patron (grateful for a well-taught son) to his present Christian beat; betakes himself to thegatehouse, on his way home to his early tea.
'Sorry to hear from Tope that you have not been well, Jasper.'
'O, it was nothing, nothing!'
'You look a little worn.'
'Do I? O, I don't think so. What is better, I don't feel so. Tope has made too much of it, I
suspect. It's his trade to make the most of everything appertaining to the Cathedral, you know.'
'I may tell the Dean - I call expressly from the Dean - that you are all right again?'
The reply, with a slight smile, is: 'Certainly; with my respects and thanks to the Dean.'
'I'm glad to hear that you expect young Drood.'
'I expect the dear fellow every moment.'
'Ah! He will do you more good than a doctor, Jasper.'
'More good than a dozen doctors. For I love him dearly, and I don't love doctors, or doctors' stuff.'
Mr. Jasper is a dark man of some six-and-twenty, with thick, lustrous, well-arranged black hair and
whiskers. He looks older than he is, as dark men often do. His voice is deep and good, his face
and figure are good, his manner is a little sombre. His room is a little sombre, and may have had
its influence in forming his manner. It is mostly in shadow. Even when the sun shines brilliantly,
it seldom touches the grand piano in the recess, or the folio music-books on the stand, or the
book-shelves on the wall, or the unfinished picture of a blooming schoolgirl hanging over the
chimneypiece; her flowing brown hair tied with a blue riband, and her beauty remarkable for a
quite childish, almost babyish, touch of saucy discontent, comically conscious of itself. (There is
not the least artistic merit in this picture, which is a mere daub; but it is clear that the painter has
made it humorously - one might almost say, revengefully - like the original.)
'We shall miss you, Jasper, at the "Alternate Musical Wednesdays" to-night; but no doubt you are
best at home. Good-night. God bless you! "Tell me, shep-herds, te-e-ell me; tell me-e-e, haveyou seen (have you seen, have you seen, have you seen) my-y-y Floo-ora-a pass this way!"' Melodiously good Minor Canon the Reverend Septimus Crisparkle thus
delivers himself, in musical rhythm, as he withdraws his amiable face from the doorway and
conveys it downstairs.
Sounds of recognition and greeting pass between the Reverend Septimus and somebody else, at the
stair-foot. Mr. Jasper listens, starts from his chair, and catches a young fellow in his arms,
exclaiming:
'My dear Edwin!'
'My dear Jack! So glad to see you!'
'Get off your greatcoat, bright boy, and sit down here in your own corner. Your feet are not wet?
Pull your boots off. Do pull your boots off.'
'My dear Jack, I am as dry as a bone. Don't moddley-coddley, there's a good fellow. I like
anything better than being moddleycoddleyed.'
With the check upon him of being unsympathetically restrained in a genial outburst of enthusiasm,
Mr. Jasper stands still, and looks on intently at the young fellow, divesting himself of his outward
coat, hat, gloves, and so forth. Once for all, a look of intentness and intensity - a look of hungry,
exacting, watchful, and yet devoted affection - is always, now and ever afterwards, on the Jasper
face whenever the Jasper face is addressed in this direction. And whenever it is so addressed, it is
never, on this occasion or on any other, dividedly addressed; it is always concentrated.
'Now I am right, and now I'll take my corner, Jack. Any dinner, Jack?'
Mr. Jasper opens a door at the upper end of the room, and discloses a small inner room pleasantly
lighted and prepared, wherein a comely dame is in the act of setting dishes on table.
'What a jolly old Jack it is!' cries the young fellow, with a clap of his hands. 'Look here, Jack; tell
me; whose birthday is it?''Not yours, I know,' Mr. Jasper answers, pausing to consider.
'Not mine, you know? No; not mine, I know! Pussy's!'
Fixed as the look the young fellow meets, is, there is yet in it some strange power of suddenly
including the sketch over the chimneypiece.
'Pussy's, Jack! We must drink Many happy returns to her. Come, uncle; take your dutiful and
sharp-set nephew in to dinner.'
As the boy (for he is little more) lays a hand on Jasper's shoulder, Jasper cordially and gaily lays a
hand on HIS shoulder, and so Marseillaise-wise they go in to dinner.
'And, Lord! here's Mrs. Tope!' cries the boy. 'Lovelier than ever!'
'Never you mind me, Master Edwin,' retorts the Verger's wife; 'I can take care of myself.'
'You can't. You're much too handsome. Give me a kiss because it's Pussy's birthday.'
'I'd Pussy you, young man, if I was Pussy, as you call her,' Mrs. Tope blushingly retorts, after being
saluted. 'Your uncle's too much wrapt up in you, that's where it is. He makes so much of you,
that it's my opinion you think you've only to call your Pussys by the dozen, to make 'em come.'
'You forget, Mrs. Tope,' Mr. Jasper interposes, taking his place at the table with a genial smile, 'and
so do you, Ned, that Uncle and Nephew are words prohibited here by common consent and express
agreement. For what we are going to receive His holy name be praised!'
'Done like the Dean! Witness, Edwin Drood! Please to carve, Jack, for I can't.'
This sally ushers in the dinner. Little to the present purpose, or to any purpose, is said, while it is
in course of being disposed of. At length the cloth is drawn, and a dish of walnuts and a decanter
of rich-coloured sherry are placed upon the table.
'I say! Tell me, Jack,' the young fellow then flows on: 'do you really and truly feel as if the
mention of our relationship divided us at all? I don't.''Uncles as a rule, Ned, are so much older than their nephews,' is the reply, 'that I have that feeling
instinctively.'
'As a rule! Ah, may-be! But what is a difference in age of halfa-dozen years or so? And some uncles, in large families, are even younger than their nephews. By
George, I wish it was the case with us!'
'Why?'
'Because if it was, I'd take the lead with you, Jack, and be as wise as Begone, dull Care! that turned
a young man gray, and Begone, dull Care! that turned an old man to clay. - Halloa, Jack! Don't
drink.'
'Why not?'
'Asks why not, on Pussy's birthday, and no Happy returns proposed! Pussy, Jack, and many of
'em! Happy returns, I mean.'
Laying an affectionate and laughing touch on the boy's extended hand, as if it were at once his
giddy head and his light heart, Mr. Jasper drinks the toast in silence.
'Hip, hip, hip, and nine times nine, and one to finish with, and all that, understood. Hooray,
hooray, hooray! - And now, Jack, let's have a little talk about Pussy. Two pairs of nut-crackers?
Pass me one, and take the other.' Crack. 'How's Pussy getting on Jack?'
'With her music? Fairly.'
'What a dreadfully conscientious fellow you are, Jack! But I know, Lord bless you! Inattentive,
isn't she?'
'She can learn anything, if she will.'
'IF she will! Egad, that's it. But if she won't?'
Crack! - on Mr. Jasper's part.'How's she looking, Jack?'
Mr. Jasper's concentrated face again includes the portrait as he returns: 'Very like your sketch
indeed.'
'I AM a little proud of it,' says the young fellow, glancing up at the sketch with complacency, and
then shutting one eye, and taking a corrected prospect of it over a level bridge of nut-crackers in the
air: 'Not badly hit off from memory. But I ought to have caught that expression pretty well, for I
have seen it often enough.'
Crack! - on Edwin Drood's part.
Crack! - on Mr. Jasper's part.
'In point of fact,' the former resumes, after some silent dipping among his fragments of walnut with
an air of pique, 'I see it whenever I go to see Pussy. If I don't find it on her face, I leave it there. -
You know I do, Miss Scornful Pert. Booh!' With a twirl of the nut-crackers at the portrait.
Crack! crack! crack. Slowly, on Mr. Jasper's part.
Crack. Sharply on the part of Edwin Drood.
Silence on both sides.
'Have you lost your tongue, Jack?'
'Have you found yours, Ned?'
'No, but really; - isn't it, you know, after all - '
Mr. Jasper lifts his dark eyebrows inquiringly.
'Isn't it unsatisfactory to be cut off from choice in such a matter? There, Jack! I tell you! If I
could choose, I would choose Pussy from all the pretty girls in the world.'
'But you have not got to choose.''That's what I complain of. My dead and gone father and Pussy's dead and gone father must needs
marry us together by anticipation. Why the - Devil, I was going to say, if it had been respectful to
their memory - couldn't they leave us alone?'
'Tut, tut, dear boy,' Mr. Jasper remonstrates, in a tone of gentle deprecation.
'Tut, tut? Yes, Jack, it's all very well for YOU. YOU can take it easily. YOUR life is not laid
down to scale, and lined and dotted out for you, like a surveyor's plan. YOU have no
uncomfortable suspicion that you are forced upon anybody, nor has anybody an uncomfortable
suspicion that she is forced upon you, or that you are forced upon her. YOU can choose for
yourself. Life, for YOU, is a plum with the natural bloom on; it hasn't been over-carefully wiped
off for YOU - '
'Don't stop, dear fellow. Go on.'
'Can I anyhow have hurt your feelings, Jack?'
'How can you have hurt my feelings?'
'Good Heaven, Jack, you look frightfully ill! There's a strange film come over your eyes.'
Mr. Jasper, with a forced smile, stretches out his right hand, as if at once to disarm apprehension
and gain time to get better. After a while he says faintly:
'I have been taking opium for a pain - an agony - that sometimes overcomes me. The effects of
the medicine steal over me like a blight or a cloud, and pass. You see them in the act of passing;
they will be gone directly. Look away from me. They will go all the sooner.'
With a scared face the younger man complies by casting his eyes downward at the ashes on the
hearth. Not relaxing his own gaze on the fire, but rather strengthening it with a fierce, firm grip
upon his elbow-chair, the elder sits for a few moments rigid, and then, with thick drops standing on
his forehead, and a sharp catch of his breath, becomes as he was before. On his so subsiding in
his chair, his nephew gently and assiduously tends him while he quite recovers. When Jasper is
restored, he lays a tender hand upon his nephew's shoulder, and, in a tone of voice less troubled
than the purport of his words - indeed with something of raillery or banter in it - thus addresseshim:
'There is said to be a hidden skeleton in every house; but you thought there was none in mine, dear
Ned.'
'Upon my life, Jack, I did think so. However, when I come to consider that even in Pussy's house
- if she had one - and in mine - if I had one - '
'You were going to say (but that I interrupted you in spite of myself) what a quiet life mine is. No
whirl and uproar around me, no distracting commerce or calculation, no risk, no change of place,
myself devoted to the art I pursue, my business my pleasure.'
'I really was going to say something of the kind, Jack; but you see, you, speaking of yourself,
almost necessarily leave out much that I should have put in. For instance: I should have put in
the foreground your being so much respected as Lay Precentor, or Lay Clerk, or whatever you call
it, of this Cathedral; your enjoying the reputation of having done such wonders with the choir; your
choosing your society, and holding such an independent position in this queer old place; your gift
of teaching (why, even Pussy, who don't like being taught, says there never was such a Master as
you are!), and your connexion.'
'Yes; I saw what you were tending to. I hate it.'
'Hate it, Jack?' (Much bewildered.)
'I hate it. The cramped monotony of my existence grinds me away by the grain. How does our
service sound to you?'
'Beautiful! Quite celestial!'
'It often sounds to me quite devilish. I am so weary of it. The echoes of my own voice among
the arches seem to mock me with my daily drudging round. No wretched monk who droned his
life away in that gloomy place, before me, can have been more tired of it than I am. He could take
for relief (and did take) to carving demons out of the stalls and seats and desks. What shall I do?
Must I take to carving them out of my heart?'
'I thought you had so exactly found your niche in life, Jack,' Edwin Drood returns, astonished,bending forward in his chair to lay a sympathetic hand on Jasper's knee, and looking at him with an
anxious face.
'I know you thought so. They all think so.'
'Well, I suppose they do,' says Edwin, meditating aloud. 'Pussy thinks so.'
'When did she tell you that?'
'The last time I was here. You remember when. Three months ago.'
'How did she phrase it?'
'O, she only said that she had become your pupil, and that you were made for your vocation.'
The younger man glances at the portrait. The elder sees it in him.
'Anyhow, my dear Ned,' Jasper resumes, as he shakes his head with a grave cheerfulness, 'I must
subdue myself to my vocation: which is much the same thing outwardly. It's too late to find
another now. This is a confidence between us.'
'It shall be sacredly preserved, Jack.'
'I have reposed it in you, because - '
'I feel it, I assure you. Because we are fast friends, and because you love and trust me, as I love
and trust you. Both hands, Jack.'
As each stands looking into the other's eyes, and as the uncle holds the nephew's hands, the uncle
thus proceeds:
'You know now, don't you, that even a poor monotonous chorister and grinder of music - in his
niche - may be troubled with some stray sort of ambition, aspiration, restlessness, dissatisfaction,
what shall we call it?'
'Yes, dear Jack.''And you will remember?'
'My dear Jack, I only ask you, am I likely to forget what you have said with so much feeling?'
'Take it as a warning, then.'
In the act of having his hands released, and of moving a step back, Edwin pauses for an instant to
consider the application of these last words. The instant over, he says, sensibly touched:
'I am afraid I am but a shallow, surface kind of fellow, Jack, and that my headpiece is none of the
best. But I needn't say I am young; and perhaps I shall not grow worse as I grow older. At all
events, I hope I have something impressible within me, which feels - deeply feels - the
disinterestedness of your painfully laying your inner self bare, as a warning to me.'
Mr. Jasper's steadiness of face and figure becomes so marvellous that his breathing seems to have
stopped.
'I couldn't fail to notice, Jack, that it cost you a great effort, and that you were very much moved,
and very unlike your usual self. Of course I knew that you were extremely fond of me, but I really
was not prepared for your, as I may say, sacrificing yourself to me in that way.'
Mr. Jasper, becoming a breathing man again without the smallest stage of transition between the
two extreme states, lifts his shoulders, laughs, and waves his right arm.
'No; don't put the sentiment away, Jack; please don't; for I am very much in earnest. I have no
doubt that that unhealthy state of mind which you have so powerfully described is attended with
some real suffering, and is hard to bear. But let me reassure you, Jack, as to the chances of its
overcoming me. I don't think I am in the way of it. In some few months less than another year,
you know, I shall carry Pussy off from school as Mrs. Edwin Drood. I shall then go engineering
into the East, and Pussy with me. And although we have our little tiffs now, arising out of a
certain unavoidable flatness that attends our love-making, owing to its end being all settled
beforehand, still I have no doubt of our getting on capitally then, when it's done and can't be helped.
In short, Jack, to go back to the old song I was freely quoting at dinner (and who knows old songs
better than you?), my wife shall dance, and I will sing, so merrily pass the day. Of Pussy's being
beautiful there cannot be a doubt; - and when you are good besides, Little Miss Impudence,' oncemore apostrophising the portrait, 'I'll burn your comic likeness, and paint your music-master
another.'
Mr. Jasper, with his hand to his chin, and with an expression of musing benevolence on his face,
has attentively watched every animated look and gesture attending the delivery of these words.
He remains in that attitude after they, are spoken, as if in a kind of fascination attendant on his
strong interest in the youthful spirit that he loves so well. Then he says with a quiet smile:
'You won't be warned, then?'
'No, Jack.'
'You can't be warned, then?'
'No, Jack, not by you. Besides that I don't really consider myself in danger, I don't like your
putting yourself in that position.'
'Shall we go and walk in the churchyard?'
'By all means. You won't mind my slipping out of it for half a moment to the Nuns' House, and
leaving a parcel there? Only gloves for Pussy; as many pairs of gloves as she is years old to-day.
Rather poetical, Jack?'
Mr. Jasper, still in the same attitude, murmurs: '"Nothing half so sweet in life," Ned!'
'Here's the parcel in my greatcoat-pocket. They must be presented to-night, or the poetry is gone.
It's against regulations for me to call at night, but not to leave a packet. I am ready, Jack!'
Mr. Jasper dissolves his attitude, and they go out together.
CHAPTER III - THE NUNS' HOUSEFOR sufficient reasons, which this narrative will itself unfold as it advances, a fictitious name must
be bestowed upon the old Cathedral town. Let it stand in these pages as Cloisterham. It was
once possibly known to the Druids by another name, and certainly to the Romans by another, and to
the Saxons by another, and to the Normans by another; and a name more or less in the course of
many centuries can be of little moment to its dusty chronicles.
An ancient city, Cloisterham, and no meet dwelling-place for any one with hankerings after the
noisy world. A monotonous, silent city, deriving an earthy flavour throughout from its Cathedral
crypt, and so abounding in vestiges of monastic graves, that the Cloisterham children grow small
salad in the dust of abbots and abbesses, and make dirt-pies of nuns and friars; while every
ploughman in its outlying fields renders to once puissant Lord Treasurers, Archbishops, Bishops,
and such-like, the attention which the Ogre in the story-book desired to render to his unbidden
visitor, and grinds their bones to make his bread.
A drowsy city, Cloisterham, whose inhabitants seem to suppose, with an inconsistency more
strange than rare, that all its changes lie behind it, and that there are no more to come. A queer
moral to derive from antiquity, yet older than any traceable antiquity. So silent are the streets of
Cloisterham (though prone to echo on the smallest provocation), that of a summer-day the
sunblinds of its shops scarce dare to flap in the south wind; while the sun-browned tramps, who
pass along and stare, quicken their limp a little, that they may the sooner get beyond the confines of
its oppressive respectability. This is a feat not difficult of achievement, seeing that the streets of
Cloisterham city are little more than one narrow street by which you get into it and get out of it:
the rest being mostly disappointing yards with pumps in them and no thoroughfare - exception
made of the Cathedral-close, and a paved Quaker settlement, in colour and general confirmation
very like a Quakeress's bonnet, up in a shady corner.
In a word, a city of another and a bygone time is Cloisterham, with its hoarse Cathedral-bell, its
hoarse rooks hovering about the Cathedral tower, its hoarser and less distinct rooks in the stalls far
beneath. Fragments of old wall, saint's chapel, chapter-house, convent and monastery, have got
incongruously or obstructively built into many of its houses and gardens, much as kindred jumbled
notions have become incorporated into many of its citizens' minds. All things in it are of the past.
Even its single pawnbroker takes in no pledges, nor has he for a long time, but offers vainly an
unredeemed stock for sale, of which the costlier articles are dim and pale old watches apparently in
a slow perspiration, tarnished sugar-tongs with ineffectual legs, and odd volumes of dismal books.
The most abundant and the most agreeable evidences of progressing life in Cloisterham are theevidences of vegetable life in many gardens; even its drooping and despondent little theatre has its
poor strip of garden, receiving the foul fiend, when he ducks from its stage into the infernal regions,
among scarlet-beans or oystershells, according to the season of the year.
In the midst of Cloisterham stands the Nuns' House: a venerable brick edifice, whose present
appellation is doubtless derived from the legend of its conventual uses. On the trim gate enclosing
its old courtyard is a resplendent brass plate flashing forth the legend: 'Seminary for Young
Ladies. Miss Twinkleton.' The housefront is so old and worn, and the brass plate is so shining and staring, that the general result has
reminded imaginative strangers of a battered old beau with a large modern eye-glass stuck in his
blind eye.
Whether the nuns of yore, being of a submissive rather than a stiff-necked generation, habitually
bent their contemplative heads to avoid collision with the beams in the low ceilings of the many
chambers of their House; whether they sat in its long low windows telling their beads for their
mortification, instead of making necklaces of them for their adornment; whether they were ever
walled up alive in odd angles and jutting gables of the building for having some ineradicable leaven
of busy mother Nature in them which has kept the fermenting world alive ever since; these may be
matters of interest to its haunting ghosts (if any), but constitute no item in Miss Twinkleton's
half-yearly accounts. They are neither of Miss Twinkleton's inclusive regulars, nor of her extras.
The lady who undertakes the poetical department of the establishment at so much (or so little) a
quarter has no pieces in her list of recitals bearing on such unprofitable questions.
As, in some cases of drunkenness, and in others of animal magnetism, there are two states of
consciousness which never clash, but each of which pursues its separate course as though it were
continuous instead of broken (thus, if I hide my watch when I am drunk, I must be drunk again
before I can remember where), so Miss Twinkleton has two distinct and separate phases of being.
Every night, the moment the young ladies have retired to rest, does Miss Twinkleton smarten up her
curls a little, brighten up her eyes a little, and become a sprightlier Miss Twinkleton than the young
ladies have ever seen. Every night, at the same hour, does Miss Twinkleton resume the topics of
the previous night, comprehending the tenderer scandal of Cloisterham, of which she has no
knowledge whatever by day, and references to a certain season at Tunbridge Wells (airily called by
Miss Twinkleton in this state of her existence 'The Wells'), notably the season wherein a certain
finished gentleman (compassionately called by Miss Twinkleton, in this stage of her existence,
'Foolish Mr. Porters') revealed a homage of the heart, whereof Miss Twinkleton, in her scholasticstate of existence, is as ignorant as a granite pillar. Miss Twinkleton's companion in both states of
existence, and equally adaptable to either, is one Mrs. Tisher: a deferential widow with a weak
back, a chronic sigh, and a suppressed voice, who looks after the young ladies' wardrobes, and
leads them to infer that she has seen better days. Perhaps this is the reason why it is an article of
faith with the servants, handed down from race to race, that the departed Tisher was a hairdresser.
The pet pupil of the Nuns' House is Miss Rosa Bud, of course called Rosebud; wonderfully pretty,
wonderfully childish, wonderfully whimsical. An awkward interest (awkward because romantic)
attaches to Miss Bud in the minds of the young ladies, on account of its being known to them that a
husband has been chosen for her by will and bequest, and that her guardian is bound down to
bestow her on that husband when he comes of age. Miss Twinkleton, in her seminarial state of
existence, has combated the romantic aspect of this destiny by affecting to shake her head over it
behind Miss Bud's dimpled shoulders, and to brood on the unhappy lot of that doomed little victim.
But with no better effect - possibly some unfelt touch of foolish Mr. Porters has undermined the
endeavour - than to evoke from the young ladies an unanimous bedchamber cry of 'O, what a
pretending old thing Miss Twinkleton is, my dear!'
The Nuns' House is never in such a state of flutter as when this allotted husband calls to see little
Rosebud. (It is unanimously understood by the young ladies that he is lawfully entitled to this
privilege, and that if Miss Twinkleton disputed it, she would be instantly taken up and transported.)
When his ring at the gatebell is expected, or takes place, every young lady who can, under any pretence, look out of window,
looks out of window; while every young lady who is 'practising,' practises out of time; and the
French class becomes so demoralised that the mark goes round as briskly as the bottle at a
convivial party in the last century.
On the afternoon of the day next after the dinner of two at the gatehouse, the bell is rung with the
usual fluttering results.
'Mr. Edwin Drood to see Miss Rosa.'
This is the announcement of the parlour-maid in chief. Miss Twinkleton, with an exemplary air of
melancholy on her, turns to the sacrifice, and says, 'You may go down, my dear.' Miss Bud goes
down, followed by all eyes.
Mr. Edwin Drood is waiting in Miss Twinkleton's own parlour: a dainty room, with nothing moredirectly scholastic in it than a terrestrial and a celestial globe. These expressive machines imply
(to parents and guardians) that even when Miss Twinkleton retires into the bosom of privacy, duty
may at any moment compel her to become a sort of Wandering Jewess, scouring the earth and
soaring through the skies in search of knowledge for her pupils.
The last new maid, who has never seen the young gentleman Miss Rosa is engaged to, and who is
making his acquaintance between the hinges of the open door, left open for the purpose, stumbles
guiltily down the kitchen stairs, as a charming little apparition, with its face concealed by a little
silk apron thrown over its head, glides into the parlour.
'O! IT IS so ridiculous!' says the apparition, stopping and shrinking. 'Don't, Eddy!'
'Don't what, Rosa?'
'Don't come any nearer, please. It IS so absurd.'
'What is absurd, Rosa?'
'The whole thing is. It IS so absurd to be an engaged orphan and it IS so absurd to have the girls
and the servants scuttling about after one, like mice in the wainscot; and it IS so absurd to be called
upon!'
The apparition appears to have a thumb in the corner of its mouth while making this complaint.
'You give me an affectionate reception, Pussy, I must say.'
'Well, I will in a minute, Eddy, but I can't just yet. How are you?' (very shortly.)
'I am unable to reply that I am much the better for seeing you, Pussy, inasmuch as I see nothing of
you.'
This second remonstrance brings a dark, bright, pouting eye out from a corner of the apron; but it
swiftly becomes invisible again, as the apparition exclaims: 'O good gracious! you have had half
your hair cut off!'
'I should have done better to have had my head cut off, I think,' says Edwin, rumpling the hair inquestion, with a fierce glance at the looking-glass, and giving an impatient stamp. 'Shall I go?'
'No; you needn't go just yet, Eddy. The girls would all be asking questions why you went.'
'Once for all, Rosa, will you uncover that ridiculous little head of yours and give me a welcome?'
The apron is pulled off the childish head, as its wearer replies: 'You're very welcome, Eddy.
There! I'm sure that's nice. Shake hands. No, I can't kiss you, because I've got an acidulated
drop in my mouth.'
'Are you at all glad to see me, Pussy?'
'O, yes, I'm dreadfully glad. - Go and sit down. - Miss Twinkleton.'
It is the custom of that excellent lady when these visits occur, to appear every three minutes, either
in her own person or in that of Mrs. Tisher, and lay an offering on the shrine of Propriety by
affecting to look for some desiderated article. On the present occasion Miss Twinkleton,
gracefully gliding in and out, says in passing: 'How do you do, Mr. Drood? Very glad indeed to
have the pleasure. Pray excuse me. Tweezers. Thank you!'
'I got the gloves last evening, Eddy, and I like them very much. They are beauties.'
'Well, that's something,' the affianced replies, half grumbling. 'The smallest encouragement
thankfully received. And how did you pass your birthday, Pussy?'
'Delightfully! Everybody gave me a present. And we had a feast. And we had a ball at night.'
'A feast and a ball, eh? These occasions seem to go off tolerably well without me, Pussy.'
'De-lightfully!' cries Rosa, in a quite spontaneous manner, and without the least pretence of reserve.
'Hah! And what was the feast?'
'Tarts, oranges, jellies, and shrimps.'
'Any partners at the ball?''We danced with one another, of course, sir. But some of the girls made game to be their brothers.
It WAS so droll!'
'Did anybody make game to be - '
'To be you? O dear yes!' cries Rosa, laughing with great enjoyment. 'That was the first thing
done.'
'I hope she did it pretty well,' says Edwin rather doubtfully.
'O, it was excellent! - I wouldn't dance with you, you know.'
Edwin scarcely seems to see the force of this; begs to know if he may take the liberty to ask why?
'Because I was so tired of you,' returns Rosa. But she quickly adds, and pleadingly too, seeing
displeasure in his face: 'Dear Eddy, you were just as tired of me, you know.'
'Did I say so, Rosa?'
'Say so! Do you ever say so? No, you only showed it. O, she did it so well!' cries Rosa, in a
sudden ecstasy with her counterfeit betrothed.
'It strikes me that she must be a devilish impudent girl,' says Edwin Drood. 'And so, Pussy, you
have passed your last birthday in this old house.'
'Ah, yes!' Rosa clasps her hands, looks down with a sigh, and shakes her head.
'You seem to be sorry, Rosa.'
'I am sorry for the poor old place. Somehow, I feel as if it would miss me, when I am gone so far
away, so young.'
'Perhaps we had better stop short, Rosa?'
She looks up at him with a swift bright look; next moment shakes her head, sighs, and looks downagain.
'That is to say, is it, Pussy, that we are both resigned?'
She nods her head again, and after a short silence, quaintly bursts out with: 'You know we must
be married, and married from here, Eddy, or the poor girls will be so dreadfully disappointed!'
For the moment there is more of compassion, both for her and for himself, in her affianced
husband's face, than there is of love. He checks the look, and asks: 'Shall I take you out for a
walk, Rosa dear?'
Rosa dear does not seem at all clear on this point, until her face, which has been comically
reflective, brightens. 'O, yes, Eddy; let us go for a walk! And I tell you what we'll do. You
shall pretend that you are engaged to somebody else, and I'll pretend that I am not engaged to
anybody, and then we shan't quarrel.'
'Do you think that will prevent our falling out, Rosa?'
'I know it will. Hush! Pretend to look out of window - Mrs. Tisher!'
Through a fortuitous concourse of accidents, the matronly Tisher heaves in sight, says, in rustling
through the room like the legendary ghost of a dowager in silken skirts: 'I hope I see Mr. Drood
well; though I needn't ask, if I may judge from his complexion. I trust I disturb no one; but there
WAS a paper-knife - O, thank you, I am sure!' and disappears with her prize.
'One other thing you must do, Eddy, to oblige me,' says Rosebud. 'The moment we get into the
street, you must put me outside, and keep close to the house yourself - squeeze and graze yourself
against it.'
'By all means, Rosa, if you wish it. Might I ask why?'
'O! because I don't want the girls to see you.'
'It's a fine day; but would you like me to carry an umbrella up?'
'Don't be foolish, sir. You haven't got polished leather boots on,' pouting, with one shoulderraised.
'Perhaps that might escape the notice of the girls, even if they did see me,' remarks Edwin, looking
down at his boots with a sudden distaste for them.
'Nothing escapes their notice, sir. And then I know what would happen. Some of them would
begin reflecting on me by saying (for THEY are free) that they never will on any account engage
themselves to lovers without polished leather boots. Hark! Miss Twinkleton. I'll ask for leave.'
That discreet lady being indeed heard without, inquiring of nobody in a blandly conversational tone
as she advances: 'Eh? Indeed! Are you quite sure you saw my mother-of-pearl button-holder
on the work-table in my room?' is at once solicited for walking leave, and graciously accords it.
And soon the young couple go out of the Nuns' House, taking all precautions against the discovery
of the so vitally defective boots of Mr. Edwin Drood: precautions, let us hope, effective for the
peace of Mrs. Edwin Drood that is to be.
'Which way shall we take, Rosa?'
Rosa replies: 'I want to go to the Lumps-of-Delight shop.'
'To the - ?'
'A Turkish sweetmeat, sir. My gracious me, don't you understand anything? Call yourself an
Engineer, and not know THAT?'
'Why, how should I know it, Rosa?'
'Because I am very fond of them. But O! I forgot what we are to pretend. No, you needn't know
anything about them; never mind.'
So he is gloomily borne off to the Lumps-of-Delight shop, where Rosa makes her purchase, and,
after offering some to him (which he rather indignantly declines), begins to partake of it with great
zest: previously taking off and rolling up a pair of little pink gloves, like rose-leaves, and
occasionally putting her little pink fingers to her rosy lips, to cleanse them from the Dust of Delight
that comes off the Lumps.'Now, be a good-tempered Eddy, and pretend. And so you are engaged?'
'And so I am engaged.'
'Is she nice?'
'Charming.'
'Tall?'
'Immensely tall!' Rosa being short.
'Must be gawky, I should think,' is Rosa's quiet commentary.
'I beg your pardon; not at all,' contradiction rising in him.
'What is termed a fine woman; a splendid woman.'
'Big nose, no doubt,' is the quiet commentary again.
'Not a little one, certainly,' is the quick reply, (Rosa's being a little one.)
'Long pale nose, with a red knob in the middle. I know the sort of nose,' says Rosa, with a
satisfied nod, and tranquilly enjoying the Lumps.
'You DON'T know the sort of nose, Rosa,' with some warmth; 'because it's nothing of the kind.'
'Not a pale nose, Eddy?'
'No.' Determined not to assent.
'A red nose? O! I don't like red noses. However; to be sure she can always powder it.'
'She would scorn to powder it,' says Edwin, becoming heated.
'Would she? What a stupid thing she must be! Is she stupid in everything?''No; in nothing.'
After a pause, in which the whimsically wicked face has not been unobservant of him, Rosa says:
'And this most sensible of creatures likes the idea of being carried off to Egypt; does she, Eddy?'
'Yes. She takes a sensible interest in triumphs of engineering skill: especially when they are to
change the whole condition of an undeveloped country.'
'Lor!' says Rosa, shrugging her shoulders, with a little laugh of wonder.
'Do you object,' Edwin inquires, with a majestic turn of his eyes downward upon the fairy figure:
'do you object, Rosa, to her feeling that interest?'
'Object? my dear Eddy! But really, doesn't she hate boilers and things?'
'I can answer for her not being so idiotic as to hate Boilers,' he returns with angry emphasis; 'though
I cannot answer for her views about Things; really not understanding what Things are meant.'
'But don't she hate Arabs, and Turks, and Fellahs, and people?'
'Certainly not.' Very firmly.
'At least she MUST hate the Pyramids? Come, Eddy?'
'Why should she be such a little - tall, I mean - goose, as to hate the Pyramids, Rosa?'
'Ah! you should hear Miss Twinkleton,' often nodding her head, and much enjoying the Lumps,
'bore about them, and then you wouldn't ask. Tiresome old burying-grounds! Isises, and Ibises,
and Cheopses, and Pharaohses; who cares about them? And then there was Belzoni, or somebody,
dragged out by the legs, half-choked with bats and dust. All the girls say: Serve him right, and
hope it hurt him, and wish he had been quite choked.'
The two youthful figures, side by side, but not now arm-in-arm, wander discontentedly about the
old Close; and each sometimes stops and slowly imprints a deeper footstep in the fallen leaves.'Well!' says Edwin, after a lengthy silence. 'According to custom. We can't get on, Rosa.'
Rosa tosses her head, and says she don't want to get on.
'That's a pretty sentiment, Rosa, considering.'
'Considering what?'
'If I say what, you'll go wrong again.'
'YOU'LL go wrong, you mean, Eddy. Don't be ungenerous.'
'Ungenerous! I like that!'
'Then I DON'T like that, and so I tell you plainly,' Rosa pouts.
'Now, Rosa, I put it to you. Who disparaged my profession, my destination - '
'You are not going to be buried in the Pyramids, I hope?' she interrupts, arching her delicate
eyebrows. 'You never said you were. If you are, why haven't you mentioned it to me? I can't
find out your plans by instinct.'
'Now, Rosa, you know very well what I mean, my dear.'
'Well then, why did you begin with your detestable red-nosed giantesses? And she would, she
would, she would, she would, she WOULD powder it!' cries Rosa, in a little burst of comical
contradictory spleen.
'Somehow or other, I never can come right in these discussions,' says Edwin, sighing and becoming
resigned.
'How is it possible, sir, that you ever can come right when you're always wrong? And as to
Belzoni, I suppose he's dead; - I'm sure I hope he is - and how can his legs or his chokes concern
you?''It is nearly time for your return, Rosa. We have not had a very happy walk, have we?'
'A happy walk? A detestably unhappy walk, sir. If I go up-stairs the moment I get in and cry till
I can't take my dancing lesson, you are responsible, mind!'
'Let us be friends, Rosa.'
'Ah!' cries Rosa, shaking her head and bursting into real tears, 'I wish we COULD be friends! It's
because we can't be friends, that we try one another so. I am a young little thing, Eddy, to have an
old heartache; but I really, really have, sometimes. Don't be angry. I know you have one
yourself too often. We should both of us have done better, if What is to be had been left What
might have been. I am quite a little serious thing now, and not teasing you. Let each of us
forbear, this one time, on our own account, and on the other's!'
Disarmed by this glimpse of a woman's nature in the spoilt child, though for an instant disposed to
resent it as seeming to involve the enforced infliction of himself upon her, Edwin Drood stands
watching her as she childishly cries and sobs, with both hands to the handkerchief at her eyes, and
then - she becoming more composed, and indeed beginning in her young inconstancy to laugh at
herself for having been so moved - leads her to a seat hard by, under the elm-trees.
'One clear word of understanding, Pussy dear. I am not clever out of my own line - now I come to
think of it, I don't know that I am particularly clever in it - but I want to do right. There is not -
there may be - I really don't see my way to what I want to say, but I must say it before we part -
there is not any other young - '
'O no, Eddy! It's generous of you to ask me; but no, no, no!'
They have come very near to the Cathedral windows, and at this moment the organ and the choir
sound out sublimely. As they sit listening to the solemn swell, the confidence of last night rises in
young Edwin Drood's mind, and he thinks how unlike this music is to that discordance.
'I fancy I can distinguish Jack's voice,' is his remark in a low tone in connection with the train of
thought.
'Take me back at once, please,' urges his Affianced, quickly laying her light hand upon his wrist.
'They will all be coming out directly; let us get away. O, what a resounding chord! But don't letus stop to listen to it; let us get away!'
Her hurry is over as soon as they have passed out of the Close. They go arm-in-arm now, gravely
and deliberately enough, along the old High-street, to the Nuns' House. At the gate, the street
being within sight empty, Edwin bends down his face to Rosebud's.
She remonstrates, laughing, and is a childish schoolgirl again.
'Eddy, no! I'm too sticky to be kissed. But give me your hand, and I'll blow a kiss into that.'
He does so. She breathes a light breath into it and asks, retaining it and looking into it:-
'Now say, what do you see?'
'See, Rosa?'
'Why, I thought you Egyptian boys could look into a hand and see all sorts of phantoms. Can't
you see a happy Future?'
For certain, neither of them sees a happy Present, as the gate opens and closes, and one goes in, and
the other goes away.
CHAPTER IV - MR. SAPSEA
ACCEPTING the Jackass as the type of self-sufficient stupidity and conceit - a custom, perhaps,
like some few other customs, more conventional than fair - then the purest jackass in Cloisterham is
Mr. Thomas Sapsea, Auctioneer.
Mr. Sapsea 'dresses at' the Dean; has been bowed to for the Dean, in mistake; has even been spoken
to in the street as My Lord, under the impression that he was the Bishop come down unexpectedly,
without his chaplain. Mr. Sapsea is very proud of this, and of his voice, and of his style. He haseven (in selling landed property) tried the experiment of slightly intoning in his pulpit, to make
himself more like what he takes to be the genuine ecclesiastical article. So, in ending a Sale by
Public Auction, Mr. Sapsea finishes off with an air of bestowing a benediction on the assembled
brokers, which leaves the real Dean - a modest and worthy gentleman - far behind.
Mr. Sapsea has many admirers; indeed, the proposition is carried by a large local majority, even
including non-believers in his wisdom, that he is a credit to Cloisterham. He possesses the great
qualities of being portentous and dull, and of having a roll in his speech, and another roll in his gait;
not to mention a certain gravely flowing action with his hands, as if he were presently going to
Confirm the individual with whom he holds discourse. Much nearer sixty years of age than fifty,
with a flowing outline of stomach, and horizontal creases in his waistcoat; reputed to be rich;
voting at elections in the strictly respectable interest; morally satisfied that nothing but he himself
has grown since he was a baby; how can dunder-headed Mr. Sapsea be otherwise than a credit to
Cloisterham, and society?
Mr. Sapsea's premises are in the High-street, over against the Nuns' House. They are of about the
period of the Nuns' House, irregularly modernised here and there, as steadily deteriorating
generations found, more and more, that they preferred air and light to Fever and the Plague. Over
the doorway is a wooden effigy, about half life-size, representing Mr. Sapsea's father, in a curly wig
and toga, in the act of selling. The chastity of the idea, and the natural appearance of the little
finger, hammer, and pulpit, have been much admired.
Mr. Sapsea sits in his dull ground-floor sitting-room, giving first on his paved back yard; and then
on his railed-off garden. Mr. Sapsea has a bottle of port wine on a table before the fire - the fire is
an early luxury, but pleasant on the cool, chilly autumn evening - and is characteristically attended
by his portrait, his eight-day clock, and his weather-glass. Characteristically, because he would
uphold himself against mankind, his weather-glass against weather, and his clock against time.
By Mr. Sapsea's side on the table are a writing-desk and writing materials. Glancing at a scrap of
manuscript, Mr. Sapsea reads it to himself with a lofty air, and then, slowly pacing the room with
his thumbs in the arm-holes of his waistcoat, repeats it from memory: so internally, though with
much dignity, that the word 'Ethelinda' is alone audible.
There are three clean wineglasses in a tray on the table. His serving-maid entering, and
announcing 'Mr. Jasper is come, sir,' Mr. Sapsea waves 'Admit him,' and draws two wineglasses
from the rank, as being claimed.'Glad to see you, sir. I congratulate myself on having the honour of receiving you here for the first
time.' Mr. Sapsea does the honours of his house in this wise.
'You are very good. The honour is mine and the self-congratulation is mine.'
'You are pleased to say so, sir. But I do assure you that it is a satisfaction to me to receive you in
my humble home. And that is what I would not say to everybody.' Ineffable loftiness on Mr.
Sapsea's part accompanies these words, as leaving the sentence to be understood: 'You will not
easily believe that your society can be a satisfaction to a man like myself; nevertheless, it is.'
'I have for some time desired to know you, Mr. Sapsea.'
'And I, sir, have long known you by reputation as a man of taste. Let me fill your glass. I will
give you, sir,' says Mr. Sapsea, filling his own:
'When the French come over,
May we meet them at Dover!'
This was a patriotic toast in Mr. Sapsea's infancy, and he is therefore fully convinced of its being
appropriate to any subsequent era.
'You can scarcely be ignorant, Mr. Sapsea,' observes Jasper, watching the auctioneer with a smile as
the latter stretches out his legs before the fire, 'that you know the world.'
'Well, sir,' is the chuckling reply, 'I think I know something of it; something of it.'
'Your reputation for that knowledge has always interested and surprised me, and made me wish to
know you. For Cloisterham is a little place. Cooped up in it myself, I know nothing beyond it,
and feel it to be a very little place.'
'If I have not gone to foreign countries, young man,' Mr. Sapsea begins, and then stops:- 'You will
excuse me calling you young man, Mr. Jasper? You are much my junior.'
'By all means.'
'If I have not gone to foreign countries, young man, foreign countries have come to me. They
have come to me in the way of business, and I have improved upon my opportunities. Put it that Itake an inventory, or make a catalogue. I see a French clock. I never saw him before, in my life,
but I instantly lay my finger on him and say "Paris!" I see some cups and saucers of Chinese
make, equally strangers to me personally: I put my finger on them, then and there, and I say
"Pekin, Nankin, and Canton." It is the same with Japan, with Egypt, and with bamboo and
sandalwood from the East Indies; I put my finger on them all. I have put my finger on the North
Pole before now, and said "Spear of Esquimaux make, for half a pint of pale sherry!"'
'Really? A very remarkable way, Mr. Sapsea, of acquiring a knowledge of men and things.'
'I mention it, sir,' Mr. Sapsea rejoins, with unspeakable complacency, 'because, as I say, it don't do
to boast of what you are; but show how you came to be it, and then you prove it.'
'Most interesting. We were to speak of the late Mrs. Sapsea.'
'We were, sir.' Mr. Sapsea fills both glasses, and takes the decanter into safe keeping again.
'Before I consult your opinion as a man of taste on this little trifle' - holding it up - 'which is BUT a
trifle, and still has required some thought, sir, some little fever of the brow, I ought perhaps to
describe the character of the late Mrs. Sapsea, now dead three quarters of a year.'
Mr. Jasper, in the act of yawning behind his wineglass, puts down that screen and calls up a look of
interest. It is a little impaired in its expressiveness by his having a shut-up gape still to dispose of,
with watering eyes.
'Half a dozen years ago, or so,' Mr. Sapsea proceeds, 'when I had enlarged my mind up to - I will
not say to what it now is, for that might seem to aim at too much, but up to the pitch of wanting
another mind to be absorbed in it - I cast my eye about me for a nuptial partner. Because, as I say,
it is not good for man to be alone.'
Mr. Jasper appears to commit this original idea to memory.
'Miss Brobity at that time kept, I will not call it the rival establishment to the establishment at the
Nuns' House opposite, but I will call it the other parallel establishment down town. The world did
have it that she showed a passion for attending my sales, when they took place on half holidays, or
in vacation time. The world did put it about, that she admired my style. The world did notice
that as time flowed by, my style became traceable in the dictation-exercises of Miss Brobity's pupils.
Young man, a whisper even sprang up in obscure malignity, that one ignorant and besotted Churl (aparent) so committed himself as to object to it by name. But I do not believe this. For is it likely
that any human creature in his right senses would so lay himself open to be pointed at, by what I
call the finger of scorn?'
Mr. Jasper shakes his head. Not in the least likely. Mr. Sapsea, in a grandiloquent state of
absence of mind, seems to refill his visitor's glass, which is full already; and does really refill his
own, which is empty.
'Miss Brobity's Being, young man, was deeply imbued with homage to Mind. She revered Mind,
when launched, or, as I say, precipitated, on an extensive knowledge of the world. When I made
my proposal, she did me the honour to be so overshadowed with a species of Awe, as to be able to
articulate only the two words, "O Thou!" meaning myself. Her limpid blue eyes were fixed upon
me, her semitransparent hands were clasped together, pallor overspread her aquiline features, and, though
encouraged to proceed, she never did proceed a word further. I disposed of the parallel
establishment by private contract, and we became as nearly one as could be expected under the
circumstances. But she never could, and she never did, find a phrase satisfactory to her
perhaps-too-favourable estimate of my intellect. To the very last (feeble action of liver), she
addressed me in the same unfinished terms.'
Mr. Jasper has closed his eyes as the auctioneer has deepened his voice. He now abruptly opens
them, and says, in unison with the deepened voice 'Ah!' - rather as if stopping himself on the
extreme verge of adding - 'men!'
'I have been since,' says Mr. Sapsea, with his legs stretched out, and solemnly enjoying himself
with the wine and the fire, 'what you behold me; I have been since a solitary mourner; I have been
since, as I say, wasting my evening conversation on the desert air. I will not say that I have
reproached myself; but there have been times when I have asked myself the question: What if her
husband had been nearer on a level with her? If she had not had to look up quite so high, what
might the stimulating action have been upon the liver?'
Mr. Jasper says, with an appearance of having fallen into dreadfully low spirits, that he 'supposes it
was to be.'
'We can only suppose so, sir,' Mr. Sapsea coincides. 'As I say, Man proposes, Heaven disposes.
It may or may not be putting the same thought in another form; but that is the way I put it.'Mr. Jasper murmurs assent.
'And now, Mr. Jasper,' resumes the auctioneer, producing his scrap of manuscript, 'Mrs. Sapsea's
monument having had full time to settle and dry, let me take your opinion, as a man of taste, on the
inscription I have (as I before remarked, not without some little fever of the brow) drawn out for it.
Take it in your own hand. The setting out of the lines requires to be followed with the eye, as well
as the contents with the mind.'
Mr. Jasper complying, sees and reads as follows:
ETHELINDA,
Reverential Wife of
MR. THOMAS SAPSEA,
AUCTIONEER, VALUER, ESTATE AGENT, &c.,
OF THIS CITY.
Whose Knowledge of the World,
Though somewhat extensive,
Never brought him acquainted with
A SPIRIT
More capable of
LOOKING UP TO HIM.
STRANGER, PAUSE
And ask thyself the Question,
CANST THOU DO LIKEWISE?If Not,
WITH A BLUSH RETIRE.
Mr. Sapsea having risen and stationed himself with his back to the fire, for the purpose of observing
the effect of these lines on the countenance of a man of taste, consequently has his face towards the
door, when his serving-maid, again appearing, announces, 'Durdles is come, sir!' He promptly
draws forth and fills the third wineglass, as being now claimed, and replies, 'Show Durdles in.'
'Admirable!' quoth Mr. Jasper, handing back the paper.
'You approve, sir?'
'Impossible not to approve. Striking, characteristic, and complete.'
The auctioneer inclines his head, as one accepting his due and giving a receipt; and invites the
entering Durdles to take off that glass of wine (handing the same), for it will warm him.
Durdles is a stonemason; chiefly in the gravestone, tomb, and monument way, and wholly of their
colour from head to foot. No man is better known in Cloisterham. He is the chartered libertine
of the place. Fame trumpets him a wonderful workman - which, for aught that anybody knows, he
may be (as he never works); and a wonderful sot - which everybody knows he is. With the
Cathedral crypt he is better acquainted than any living authority; it may even be than any dead one.
It is said that the intimacy of this acquaintance began in his habitually resorting to that secret place,
to lock-out the Cloisterham boy-populace, and sleep off fumes of liquor: he having ready access
to the Cathedral, as contractor for rough repairs. Be this as it may, he does know much about it,
and, in the demolition of impedimental fragments of wall, buttress, and pavement, has seen strange
sights. He often speaks of himself in the third person; perhaps, being a little misty as to his own
identity, when he narrates; perhaps impartially adopting the Cloisterham nomenclature in reference
to a character of acknowledged distinction. Thus he will say, touching his strange sights:
'Durdles come upon the old chap,' in reference to a buried magnate of ancient time and high degree,
'by striking right into the coffin with his pick. The old chap gave Durdles a look with his open
eyes, as much as to say, "Is your name Durdles? Why, my man, I've been waiting for you a devil
of a time!" And then he turned to powder.' With a two-foot rule always in his pocket, and a
mason's hammer all but always in his hand, Durdles goes continually sounding and tapping all
about and about the Cathedral; and whenever he says to Tope: 'Tope, here's another old 'un in
here!' Tope announces it to the Dean as an established discovery.In a suit of coarse flannel with horn buttons, a yellow neckerchief with draggled ends, an old hat
more russet-coloured than black, and laced boots of the hue of his stony calling, Durdles leads a
hazy, gipsy sort of life, carrying his dinner about with him in a small bundle, and sitting on all
manner of tombstones to dine. This dinner of Durdles's has become quite a Cloisterham
institution: not only because of his never appearing in public without it, but because of its having
been, on certain renowned occasions, taken into custody along with Durdles (as drunk and
incapable), and exhibited before the Bench of justices at the townhall. These occasions, however,
have been few and far apart: Durdles being as seldom drunk as sober. For the rest, he is an old
bachelor, and he lives in a little antiquated hole of a house that was never finished: supposed to be
built, so far, of stones stolen from the city wall. To this abode there is an approach, ankle-deep in
stone chips, resembling a petrified grove of tombstones, urns, draperies, and broken columns, in all
stages of sculpture. Herein two journeymen incessantly chip, while other two journeymen, who
face each other, incessantly saw stone; dipping as regularly in and out of their sheltering
sentry-boxes, as if they were mechanical figures emblematical of Time and Death.
To Durdles, when he had consumed his glass of port, Mr. Sapsea intrusts that precious effort of his
Muse. Durdles unfeelingly takes out his two-foot rule, and measures the lines calmly, alloying
them with stone-grit.
'This is for the monument, is it, Mr. Sapsea?'
'The Inscription. Yes.' Mr. Sapsea waits for its effect on a common mind.
'It'll come in to a eighth of a inch,' says Durdles. 'Your servant, Mr. Jasper. Hope I see you well.'
'How are you Durdles?'
'I've got a touch of the Tombatism on me, Mr. Jasper, but that I must expect.'
'You mean the Rheumatism,' says Sapsea, in a sharp tone. (He is nettled by having his
composition so mechanically received.)
'No, I don't. I mean, Mr. Sapsea, the Tombatism. It's another sort from Rheumatism. Mr.
Jasper knows what Durdles means. You get among them Tombs afore it's well light on a winter
morning, and keep on, as the Catechism says, a-walking in the same all the days of your life, andYOU'LL know what Durdles means.'
'It is a bitter cold place,' Mr. Jasper assents, with an antipathetic shiver.
'And if it's bitter cold for you, up in the chancel, with a lot of live breath smoking out about you,
what the bitterness is to Durdles, down in the crypt among the earthy damps there, and the dead
breath of the old 'uns,' returns that individual, 'Durdles leaves you to judge. - Is this to be put in
hand at once, Mr. Sapsea?'
Mr. Sapsea, with an Author's anxiety to rush into publication, replies that it cannot be out of hand
too soon.
'You had better let me have the key then,' says Durdles.
'Why, man, it is not to be put inside the monument!'
'Durdles knows where it's to be put, Mr. Sapsea; no man better. Ask 'ere a man in Cloisterham
whether Durdles knows his work.'
Mr. Sapsea rises, takes a key from a drawer, unlocks an iron safe let into the wall, and takes from it
another key.
'When Durdles puts a touch or a finish upon his work, no matter where, inside or outside, Durdles
likes to look at his work all round, and see that his work is a-doing him credit,' Durdles explains,
doggedly.
The key proffered him by the bereaved widower being a large one, he slips his two-foot rule into a
side-pocket of his flannel trousers made for it, and deliberately opens his flannel coat, and opens
the mouth of a large breast-pocket within it before taking the key to place it in that repository.
'Why, Durdles!' exclaims Jasper, looking on amused, 'you are undermined with pockets!'
'And I carries weight in 'em too, Mr. Jasper. Feel those!' producing two other large keys.
'Hand me Mr. Sapsea's likewise. Surely this is the heaviest of the three.''You'll find 'em much of a muchness, I expect,' says Durdles. 'They all belong to monuments.
They all open Durdles's work. Durdles keeps the keys of his work mostly. Not that they're much
used.'
'By the bye,' it comes into Jasper's mind to say, as he idly examines the keys, 'I have been going to
ask you, many a day, and have always forgotten. You know they sometimes call you Stony
Durdles, don't you?'
'Cloisterham knows me as Durdles, Mr. Jasper.'
'I am aware of that, of course. But the boys sometimes - '
'O! if you mind them young imps of boys - ' Durdles gruffly interrupts.
'I don't mind them any more than you do. But there was a discussion the other day among the
Choir, whether Stony stood for Tony;' clinking one key against another.
('Take care of the wards, Mr. Jasper.')
'Or whether Stony stood for Stephen;' clinking with a change of keys.
('You can't make a pitch pipe of 'em, Mr. Jasper.')
'Or whether the name comes from your trade. How stands the fact?'
Mr. Jasper weighs the three keys in his hand, lifts his head from his idly stooping attitude over the
fire, and delivers the keys to Durdles with an ingenuous and friendly face.
But the stony one is a gruff one likewise, and that hazy state of his is always an uncertain state,
highly conscious of its dignity, and prone to take offence. He drops his two keys back into his
pocket one by one, and buttons them up; he takes his dinner-bundle from the chair-back on which
he hung it when he came in; he distributes the weight he carries, by tying the third key up in it, as
though he were an Ostrich, and liked to dine off cold iron; and he gets out of the room, deigning no
word of answer.
Mr. Sapsea then proposes a hit at backgammon, which, seasoned with his own improvingconversation, and terminating in a supper of cold roast beef and salad, beguiles the golden evening
until pretty late. Mr. Sapsea's wisdom being, in its delivery to mortals, rather of the diffuse than
the epigrammatic order, is by no means expended even then; but his visitor intimates that he will
come back for more of the precious commodity on future occasions, and Mr. Sapsea lets him off for
the present, to ponder on the instalment he carries away.
CHAPTER V - MR. DURDLES AND FRIEND
JOHN JASPER, on his way home through the Close, is brought to a stand-still by the spectacle of
Stony Durdles, dinner-bundle and all, leaning his back against the iron railing of the burial-ground
enclosing it from the old cloister-arches; and a hideous small boy in rags flinging stones at him as a
well-defined mark in the moonlight. Sometimes the stones hit him, and sometimes they miss him,
but Durdles seems indifferent to either fortune. The hideous small boy, on the contrary, whenever
he hits Durdles, blows a whistle of triumph through a jagged gap, convenient for the purpose, in the
front of his mouth, where half his teeth are wanting; and whenever he misses him, yelps out
'Mulled agin!' and tries to atone for the failure by taking a more correct and vicious aim.
'What are you doing to the man?' demands Jasper, stepping out into the moonlight from the shade.
'Making a cock-shy of him,' replies the hideous small boy.
'Give me those stones in your hand.'
'Yes, I'll give 'em you down your throat, if you come a-ketching hold of me,' says the small boy,
shaking himself loose, and backing. 'I'll smash your eye, if you don't look out!'
'Baby-Devil that you are, what has the man done to you?'
'He won't go home.'
'What is that to you?'
'He gives me a 'apenny to pelt him home if I ketches him out too late,' says the boy. And then
chants, like a little savage, half stumbling and half dancing among the rags and laces of his
dilapidated boots:-
'Widdy widdy wen!I - ket - ches - Im - out - ar - ter - ten,
Widdy widdy wy!
Then - E - don't - go - then - I - shy -
Widdy Widdy Wake-cock warning!'
- with a comprehensive sweep on the last word, and one more delivery at Durdles.
This would seem to be a poetical note of preparation, agreed upon, as a caution to Durdles to stand
clear if he can, or to betake himself homeward.
John Jasper invites the boy with a beck of his head to follow him (feeling it hopeless to drag him,
or coax him), and crosses to the iron railing where the Stony (and stoned) One is profoundly
meditating.
'Do you know this thing, this child?' asks Jasper, at a loss for a word that will define this thing.
'Deputy,' says Durdles, with a nod.
'Is that its - his - name?'
'Deputy,' assents Durdles.
'I'm man-servant up at the Travellers' Twopenny in Gas Works Garding,' this thing explains. 'All
us man-servants at Travellers' Lodgings is named Deputy. When we're chock full and the
Travellers is all a-bed I come out for my 'elth.' Then withdrawing into the road, and taking aim,
he resumes:-
'Widdy widdy wen!
I - ket - ches - Im - out - ar - ter - '
'Hold your hand,' cries Jasper, 'and don't throw while I stand so near him, or I'll kill you! Come,
Durdles; let me walk home with you to-night. Shall I carry your bundle?''Not on any account,' replies Durdles, adjusting it. 'Durdles was making his reflections here when
you come up, sir, surrounded by his works, like a poplar Author. - Your own brother-in-law;'
introducing a sarcophagus within the railing, white and cold in the moonlight. 'Mrs. Sapsea;'
introducing the monument of that devoted wife. 'Late Incumbent;' introducing the Reverend
Gentleman's broken column. 'Departed Assessed Taxes;' introducing a vase and towel, standing
on what might represent the cake of soap. 'Former pastrycook and Muffin-maker, much
respected;' introducing gravestone. 'All safe and sound here, sir, and all Durdles's work. Of the
common folk, that is merely bundled up in turf and brambles, the less said the better. A poor lot,
soon forgot.'
'This creature, Deputy, is behind us,' says Jasper, looking back. 'Is he to follow us?'
The relations between Durdles and Deputy are of a capricious kind; for, on Durdles's turning
himself about with the slow gravity of beery suddenness, Deputy makes a pretty wide circuit into
the road and stands on the defensive.
'You never cried Widdy Warning before you begun to-night,' says Durdles, unexpectedly reminded
of, or imagining, an injury.
'Yer lie, I did,' says Deputy, in his only form of polite contradiction.
'Own brother, sir,' observes Durdles, turning himself about again, and as unexpectedly forgetting
his offence as he had recalled or conceived it; 'own brother to Peter the Wild Boy! But I gave him
an object in life.'
'At which he takes aim?' Mr. Jasper suggests.
'That's it, sir,' returns Durdles, quite satisfied; 'at which he takes aim. I took him in hand and gave
him an object. What was he before? A destroyer. What work did he do? Nothing but
destruction. What did he earn by it? Short terms in Cloisterham jail. Not a person, not a piece
of property, not a winder, not a horse, nor a dog, nor a cat, nor a bird, nor a fowl, nor a pig, but what
he stoned, for want of an enlightened object. I put that enlightened object before him, and now he
can turn his honest halfpenny by the three penn'orth a week.'
'I wonder he has no competitors.''He has plenty, Mr. Jasper, but he stones 'em all away. Now, I don't know what this scheme of
mine comes to,' pursues Durdles, considering about it with the same sodden gravity; 'I don't know
what you may precisely call it. It ain't a sort of a - scheme of a - National Education?'
'I should say not,' replies Jasper.
'I should say not,' assents Durdles; 'then we won't try to give it a name.'
'He still keeps behind us,' repeats Jasper, looking over his shoulder; 'is he to follow us?'
'We can't help going round by the Travellers' Twopenny, if we go the short way, which is the back
way,' Durdles answers, 'and we'll drop him there.'
So they go on; Deputy, as a rear rank one, taking open order, and invading the silence of the hour
and place by stoning every wall, post, pillar, and other inanimate object, by the deserted way.
'Is there anything new down in the crypt, Durdles?' asks John Jasper.
'Anything old, I think you mean,' growls Durdles. 'It ain't a spot for novelty.'
'Any new discovery on your part, I meant.'
'There's a old 'un under the seventh pillar on the left as you go down the broken steps of the little
underground chapel as formerly was; I make him out (so fur as I've made him out yet) to be one of
them old 'uns with a crook. To judge from the size of the passages in the walls, and of the steps
and doors, by which they come and went, them crooks must have been a good deal in the way of
the old 'uns! Two on 'em meeting promiscuous must have hitched one another by the mitre pretty
often, I should say.'
Without any endeavour to correct the literality of this opinion, Jasper surveys his companion -
covered from head to foot with old mortar, lime, and stone grit - as though he, Jasper, were getting
imbued with a romantic interest in his weird life.
'Yours is a curious existence.'
Without furnishing the least clue to the question, whether he receives this as a compliment or asquite the reverse, Durdles gruffly answers: 'Yours is another.'
'Well! inasmuch as my lot is cast in the same old earthy, chilly, never-changing place, Yes. But
there is much more mystery and interest in your connection with the Cathedral than in mine.
Indeed, I am beginning to have some idea of asking you to take me on as a sort of student, or free
'prentice, under you, and to let me go about with you sometimes, and see some of these odd nooks
in which you pass your days.'
The Stony One replies, in a general way, 'All right. Everybody knows where to find Durdles,
when he's wanted.' Which, if not strictly true, is approximately so, if taken to express that Durdles
may always be found in a state of vagabondage somewhere.
'What I dwell upon most,' says Jasper, pursuing his subject of romantic interest, 'is the remarkable
accuracy with which you would seem to find out where people are buried. - What is the matter?
That bundle is in your way; let me hold it.'
Durdles has stopped and backed a little (Deputy, attentive to all his movements, immediately
skirmishing into the road), and was looking about for some ledge or corner to place his bundle on,
when thus relieved of it.
'Just you give me my hammer out of that,' says Durdles, 'and I'll show you.'
Clink, clink. And his hammer is handed him.
'Now, lookee here. You pitch your note, don't you, Mr. Jasper?'
'Yes.'
'So I sound for mine. I take my hammer, and I tap.' (Here he strikes the pavement, and the
attentive Deputy skirmishes at a rather wider range, as supposing that his head may be in
requisition.) 'I tap, tap, tap. Solid! I go on tapping. Solid still! Tap again. Holloa!
Hollow! Tap again, persevering. Solid in hollow! Tap, tap, tap, to try it better. Solid in
hollow; and inside solid, hollow again! There you are! Old 'un crumbled away in stone coffin,
in vault!'
'Astonishing!''I have even done this,' says Durdles, drawing out his two-foot rule (Deputy meanwhile skirmishing
nearer, as suspecting that Treasure may be about to be discovered, which may somehow lead to his
own enrichment, and the delicious treat of the discoverers being hanged by the neck, on his
evidence, until they are dead). 'Say that hammer of mine's a wall - my work. Two; four; and two
is six,' measuring on the pavement. 'Six foot inside that wall is Mrs. Sapsea.'
'Not really Mrs. Sapsea?'
'Say Mrs. Sapsea. Her wall's thicker, but say Mrs. Sapsea. Durdles taps, that wall represented by
that hammer, and says, after good sounding: "Something betwixt us!" Sure enough, some
rubbish has been left in that same six-foot space by Durdles's men!'
Jasper opines that such accuracy 'is a gift.'
'I wouldn't have it at a gift,' returns Durdles, by no means receiving the observation in good part.
'I worked it out for myself. Durdles comes by HIS knowledge through grubbing deep for it, and
having it up by the roots when it don't want to come. - Holloa you Deputy!'
'Widdy!' is Deputy's shrill response, standing off again.
'Catch that ha'penny. And don't let me see any more of you tonight, after we come to the Travellers' Twopenny.'
'Warning!' returns Deputy, having caught the halfpenny, and appearing by this mystic word to
express his assent to the arrangement.
They have but to cross what was once the vineyard, belonging to what was once the Monastery, to
come into the narrow back lane wherein stands the crazy wooden house of two low stories currently
known as the Travellers' Twopenny:- a house all warped and distorted, like the morals of the
travellers, with scant remains of a lattice-work porch over the door, and also of a rustic fence before
its stamped-out garden; by reason of the travellers being so bound to the premises by a tender
sentiment (or so fond of having a fire by the roadside in the course of the day), that they can never
be persuaded or threatened into departure, without violently possessing themselves of some
wooden forget-me-not, and bearing it off.The semblance of an inn is attempted to be given to this wretched place by fragments of
conventional red curtaining in the windows, which rags are made muddily transparent in the
night-season by feeble lights of rush or cotton dip burning dully in the close air of the inside. As
Durdles and Jasper come near, they are addressed by an inscribed paper lantern over the door,
setting forth the purport of the house. They are also addressed by some half-dozen other hideous
small boys - whether twopenny lodgers or followers or hangers-on of such, who knows! - who, as if
attracted by some carrion-scent of Deputy in the air, start into the moonlight, as vultures might
gather in the desert, and instantly fall to stoning him and one another.
'Stop, you young brutes,' cries Jasper angrily, 'and let us go by!'
This remonstrance being received with yells and flying stones, according to a custom of late years
comfortably established among the police regulations of our English communities, where
Christians are stoned on all sides, as if the days of Saint Stephen were revived, Durdles remarks of
the young savages, with some point, that 'they haven't got an object,' and leads the way down the
lane.
At the corner of the lane, Jasper, hotly enraged, checks his companion and looks back. All is
silent. Next moment, a stone coming rattling at his hat, and a distant yell of 'Wake-Cock!
Warning!' followed by a crow, as from some infernally-hatched Chanticleer, apprising him under
whose victorious fire he stands, he turns the corner into safety, and takes Durdles home: Durdles
stumbling among the litter of his stony yard as if he were going to turn head foremost into one of
the unfinished tombs.
John Jasper returns by another way to his gatehouse, and entering softly with his key, finds his fire
still burning. He takes from a locked press a peculiar-looking pipe, which he fills - but not with
tobacco - and, having adjusted the contents of the bowl, very carefully, with a little instrument,
ascends an inner staircase of only a few steps, leading to two rooms. One of these is his own
sleeping chamber: the other is his nephew's. There is a light in each.
His nephew lies asleep, calm and untroubled. John Jasper stands looking down upon him, his
unlighted pipe in his hand, for some time, with a fixed and deep attention. Then, hushing his
footsteps, he passes to his own room, lights his pipe, and delivers himself to the Spectres it invokes
at midnight.CHAPTER VI - PHILANTHROPY IN MINOR CANON CORNER
THE Reverend Septimus Crisparkle (Septimus, because six little brother Crisparkles before him
went out, one by one, as they were born, like six weak little rushlights, as they were lighted),
having broken the thin morning ice near Cloisterham Weir with his amiable head, much to the
invigoration of his frame, was now assisting his circulation by boxing at a looking-glass with great
science and prowess. A fresh and healthy portrait the looking-glass presented of the Reverend
Septimus, feinting and dodging with the utmost artfulness, and hitting out from the shoulder with
the utmost straightness, while his radiant features teemed with innocence, and soft-hearted
benevolence beamed from his boxing-gloves.
It was scarcely breakfast-time yet, for Mrs. Crisparkle - mother, not wife of the Reverend Septimus
- was only just down, and waiting for the urn. Indeed, the Reverend Septimus left off at this very
moment to take the pretty old lady's entering face between his boxing-gloves and kiss it. Having
done so with tenderness, the Reverend Septimus turned to again, countering with his left, and
putting in his right, in a tremendous manner.
'I say, every morning of my life, that you'll do it at last, Sept,' remarked the old lady, looking on;
'and so you will.'
'Do what, Ma dear?'
'Break the pier-glass, or burst a blood-vessel.'
'Neither, please God, Ma dear. Here's wind, Ma. Look at this!' In a concluding round of great
severity, the Reverend Septimus administered and escaped all sorts of punishment, and wound up
by getting the old lady's cap into Chancery - such is the technical term used in scientific circles by
the learned in the Noble Art - with a lightness of touch that hardly stirred the lightest lavender or
cherry riband on it. Magnanimously releasing the defeated, just in time to get his gloves into a
drawer and feign to be looking out of window in a contemplative state of mind when a servant
entered, the Reverend Septimus then gave place to the urn and other preparations for breakfast.These completed, and the two alone again, it was pleasant to see (or would have been, if there had
been any one to see it, which there never was), the old lady standing to say the Lord's Prayer aloud,
and her son, Minor Canon nevertheless, standing with bent head to hear it, he being within five
years of forty: much as he had stood to hear the same words from the same lips when he was
within five months of four.
What is prettier than an old lady - except a young lady - when her eyes are bright, when her figure
is trim and compact, when her face is cheerful and calm, when her dress is as the dress of a china
shepherdess: so dainty in its colours, so individually assorted to herself, so neatly moulded on
her? Nothing is prettier, thought the good Minor Canon frequently, when taking his seat at table
opposite his long-widowed mother. Her thought at such times may be condensed into the two
words that oftenest did duty together in all her conversations: 'My Sept!'
They were a good pair to sit breakfasting together in Minor Canon Corner, Cloisterham. For
Minor Canon Corner was a quiet place in the shadow of the Cathedral, which the cawing of the
rooks, the echoing footsteps of rare passers, the sound of the Cathedral bell, or the roll of the
Cathedral organ, seemed to render more quiet than absolute silence. Swaggering fighting men had
had their centuries of ramping and raving about Minor Canon Corner, and beaten serfs had had
their centuries of drudging and dying there, and powerful monks had had their centuries of being
sometimes useful and sometimes harmful there, and behold they were all gone out of Minor Canon
Corner, and so much the better. Perhaps one of the highest uses of their ever having been there,
was, that there might be left behind, that blessed air of tranquillity which pervaded Minor Canon
Corner, and that serenely romantic state of the mind - productive for the most part of pity and
forbearance - which is engendered by a sorrowful story that is all told, or a pathetic play that is
played out.
Red-brick walls harmoniously toned down in colour by time, strongrooted ivy, latticed windows, panelled rooms, big oaken beams in little places, and stone-walled
gardens where annual fruit yet ripened upon monkish trees, were the principal surroundings of
pretty old Mrs. Crisparkle and the Reverend Septimus as they sat at breakfast.
'And what, Ma dear,' inquired the Minor Canon, giving proof of a wholesome and vigorous appetite,
'does the letter say?'
The pretty old lady, after reading it, had just laid it down upon the breakfast-cloth. She handed it
over to her son.Now, the old lady was exceedingly proud of her bright eyes being so clear that she could read
writing without spectacles. Her son was also so proud of the circumstance, and so dutifully bent
on her deriving the utmost possible gratification from it, that he had invented the pretence that he
himself could NOT read writing without spectacles. Therefore he now assumed a pair, of grave
and prodigious proportions, which not only seriously inconvenienced his nose and his breakfast,
but seriously impeded his perusal of the letter. For, he had the eyes of a microscope and a
telescope combined, when they were unassisted.
'It's from Mr. Honeythunder, of course,' said the old lady, folding her arms.
'Of course,' assented her son. He then lamely read on:
'"Haven of Philanthropy,
Chief Offices, London, Wednesday.
'"DEAR MADAM,
'"I write in the - ;" In the what's this? What does he write in?'
'In the chair,' said the old lady.
The Reverend Septimus took off his spectacles, that he might see her face, as he exclaimed:
'Why, what should he write in?'
'Bless me, bless me, Sept,' returned the old lady, 'you don't see the context! Give it back to me,
my dear.'
Glad to get his spectacles off (for they always made his eyes water), her son obeyed: murmuring
that his sight for reading manuscript got worse and worse daily.
'"I write,"' his mother went on, reading very perspicuously and precisely, '"from the chair, to which
I shall probably be confined for some hours."'
Septimus looked at the row of chairs against the wall, with a halfprotesting and half-appealing countenance.
'"We have,"' the old lady read on with a little extra emphasis, '"a meeting of our Convened Chief
Composite Committee of Central and District Philanthropists, at our Head Haven as above; and it is
their unanimous pleasure that I take the chair."'
Septimus breathed more freely, and muttered: 'O! if he comes to THAT, let him,'
'"Not to lose a day's post, I take the opportunity of a long report being read, denouncing a public
miscreant - "'
'It is a most extraordinary thing,' interposed the gentle Minor Canon, laying down his knife and fork
to rub his ear in a vexed manner, 'that these Philanthropists are always denouncing somebody.
And it is another most extraordinary thing that they are always so violently flush of miscreants!'
'"Denouncing a public miscreant - "' - the old lady resumed, '"to get our little affair of business off
my mind. I have spoken with my two wards, Neville and Helena Landless, on the subject of their
defective education, and they give in to the plan proposed; as I should have taken good care they
did, whether they liked it or not."'
'And it is another most extraordinary thing,' remarked the Minor Canon in the same tone as before,
'that these philanthropists are so given to seizing their fellow-creatures by the scruff of the neck,
and (as one may say) bumping them into the paths of peace. - I beg your pardon, Ma dear, for
interrupting.'
'"Therefore, dear Madam, you will please prepare your son, the Rev. Mr. Septimus, to expect
Neville as an inmate to be read with, on Monday next. On the same day Helena will accompany
him to Cloisterham, to take up her quarters at the Nuns' House, the establishment recommended by
yourself and son jointly. Please likewise to prepare for her reception and tuition there. The
terms in both cases are understood to be exactly as stated to me in writing by yourself, when I
opened a correspondence with you on this subject, after the honour of being introduced to you at
your sister's house in town here. With compliments to the Rev. Mr. Septimus, I am, Dear
Madam, Your affectionate brother (In Philanthropy), LUKE HONEYTHUNDER."'
'Well, Ma,' said Septimus, after a little more rubbing of his ear, 'we must try it. There can be no
doubt that we have room for an inmate, and that I have time to bestow upon him, and inclinationtoo. I must confess to feeling rather glad that he is not Mr. Honeythunder himself. Though that
seems wretchedly prejudiced - does it not? - for I never saw him. Is he a large man, Ma?'
'I should call him a large man, my dear,' the old lady replied after some hesitation, 'but that his
voice is so much larger.'
'Than himself?'
'Than anybody.'
'Hah!' said Septimus. And finished his breakfast as if the flavour of the Superior Family
Souchong, and also of the ham and toast and eggs, were a little on the wane.
Mrs. Crisparkle's sister, another piece of Dresden china, and matching her so neatly that they would
have made a delightful pair of ornaments for the two ends of any capacious old-fashioned
chimneypiece, and by right should never have been seen apart, was the childless wife of a
clergyman holding Corporation preferment in London City. Mr. Honeythunder in his public
character of Professor of Philanthropy had come to know Mrs. Crisparkle during the last
re-matching of the china ornaments (in other words during her last annual visit to her sister), after a
public occasion of a philanthropic nature, when certain devoted orphans of tender years had been
glutted with plum buns, and plump bumptiousness. These were all the antecedents known in
Minor Canon Corner of the coming pupils.
'I am sure you will agree with me, Ma,' said Mr. Crisparkle, after thinking the matter over, 'that the
first thing to be done, is, to put these young people as much at their ease as possible. There is
nothing disinterested in the notion, because we cannot be at our ease with them unless they are at
their ease with us. Now, Jasper's nephew is down here at present; and like takes to like, and youth
takes to youth. He is a cordial young fellow, and we will have him to meet the brother and sister
at dinner. That's three. We can't think of asking him, without asking Jasper. That's four. Add
Miss Twinkleton and the fairy bride that is to be, and that's six. Add our two selves, and that's
eight. Would eight at a friendly dinner at all put you out, Ma?'
'Nine would, Sept,' returned the old lady, visibly nervous.
'My dear Ma, I particularise eight.''The exact size of the table and the room, my dear.'
So it was settled that way: and when Mr. Crisparkle called with his mother upon Miss Twinkleton,
to arrange for the reception of Miss Helena Landless at the Nuns' House, the two other invitations
having reference to that establishment were proffered and accepted. Miss Twinkleton did, indeed,
glance at the globes, as regretting that they were not formed to be taken out into society; but
became reconciled to leaving them behind. Instructions were then despatched to the
Philanthropist for the departure and arrival, in good time for dinner, of Mr. Neville and Miss
Helena; and stock for soup became fragrant in the air of Minor Canon Corner.
In those days there was no railway to Cloisterham, and Mr. Sapsea said there never would be. Mr.
Sapsea said more; he said there never should be. And yet, marvellous to consider, it has come to
pass, in these days, that Express Trains don't think Cloisterham worth stopping at, but yell and
whirl through it on their larger errands, casting the dust off their wheels as a testimony against its
insignificance. Some remote fragment of Main Line to somewhere else, there was, which was
going to ruin the Money Market if it failed, and Church and State if it succeeded, and (of course),
the Constitution, whether or no; but even that had already so unsettled Cloisterham traffic, that the
traffic, deserting the high road, came sneaking in from an unprecedented part of the country by a
back stable-way, for many years labelled at the corner: 'Beware of the Dog.'
To this ignominious avenue of approach, Mr. Crisparkle repaired, awaiting the arrival of a short,
squat omnibus, with a disproportionate heap of luggage on the roof - like a little Elephant with
infinitely too much Castle - which was then the daily service between Cloisterham and external
mankind. As this vehicle lumbered up, Mr. Crisparkle could hardly see anything else of it for a
large outside passenger seated on the box, with his elbows squared, and his hands on his knees,
compressing the driver into a most uncomfortably small compass, and glowering about him with a
strongly-marked face.
'Is this Cloisterham?' demanded the passenger, in a tremendous voice.
'It is,' replied the driver, rubbing himself as if he ached, after throwing the reins to the ostler. 'And
I never was so glad to see it.'
'Tell your master to make his box-seat wider, then,' returned the passenger. 'Your master is
morally bound - and ought to be legally, under ruinous penalties - to provide for the comfort of his
fellow-man.'The driver instituted, with the palms of his hands, a superficial perquisition into the state of his
skeleton; which seemed to make him anxious.
'Have I sat upon you?' asked the passenger.
'You have,' said the driver, as if he didn't like it at all.
'Take that card, my friend.'
'I think I won't deprive you on it,' returned the driver, casting his eyes over it with no great favour,
without taking it. 'What's the good of it to me?'
'Be a Member of that Society,' said the passenger.
'What shall I get by it?' asked the driver.
'Brotherhood,' returned the passenger, in a ferocious voice.
'Thankee,' said the driver, very deliberately, as he got down; 'my mother was contented with myself,
and so am I. I don't want no brothers.'
'But you must have them,' replied the passenger, also descending, 'whether you like it or not. I am
your brother.'
' I say!' expostulated the driver, becoming more chafed in temper, 'not too fur! The worm WILL,
when - '
But here, Mr. Crisparkle interposed, remonstrating aside, in a friendly voice: 'Joe, Joe, Joe! don't
forget yourself, Joe, my good fellow!' and then, when Joe peaceably touched his hat, accosting the
passenger with: 'Mr. Honeythunder?'
'That is my name, sir.'
'My name is Crisparkle.''Reverend Mr. Septimus? Glad to see you, sir. Neville and Helena are inside. Having a little
succumbed of late, under the pressure of my public labours, I thought I would take a mouthful of
fresh air, and come down with them, and return at night. So you are the Reverend Mr. Septimus,
are you?' surveying him on the whole with disappointment, and twisting a double eyeglass by its
ribbon, as if he were roasting it, but not otherwise using it. 'Hah! I expected to see you older,
sir.'
'I hope you will,' was the good-humoured reply.
'Eh?' demanded Mr. Honeythunder.
'Only a poor little joke. Not worth repeating.'
'Joke? Ay; I never see a joke,' Mr. Honeythunder frowningly retorted. 'A joke is wasted upon me,
sir. Where are they? Helena and Neville, come here! Mr. Crisparkle has come down to meet
you.'
An unusually handsome lithe young fellow, and an unusually handsome lithe girl; much alike; both
very dark, and very rich in colour; she of almost the gipsy type; something untamed about them
both; a certain air upon them of hunter and huntress; yet withal a certain air of being the objects of
the chase, rather than the followers. Slender, supple, quick of eye and limb; half shy, half defiant;
fierce of look; an indefinable kind of pause coming and going on their whole expression, both of
face and form, which might be equally likened to the pause before a crouch or a bound. The
rough mental notes made in the first five minutes by Mr. Crisparkle would have read thus,
VERBATIM.
He invited Mr. Honeythunder to dinner, with a troubled mind (for the discomfiture of the dear old
china shepherdess lay heavy on it), and gave his arm to Helena Landless. Both she and her
brother, as they walked all together through the ancient streets, took great delight in what he
pointed out of the Cathedral and the Monastery ruin, and wondered - so his notes ran on - much as
if they were beautiful barbaric captives brought from some wild tropical dominion. Mr.
Honeythunder walked in the middle of the road, shouldering the natives out of his way, and loudly
developing a scheme he had, for making a raid on all the unemployed persons in the United
Kingdom, laying them every one by the heels in jail, and forcing them, on pain of prompt
extermination, to become philanthropists.Mrs. Crisparkle had need of her own share of philanthropy when she beheld this very large and
very loud excrescence on the little party. Always something in the nature of a Boil upon the face
of society, Mr. Honeythunder expanded into an inflammatory Wen in Minor Canon Corner.
Though it was not literally true, as was facetiously charged against him by public unbelievers, that
he called aloud to his fellow-creatures: 'Curse your souls and bodies, come here and be blessed!'
still his philanthropy was of that gunpowderous sort that the difference between it and animosity
was hard to determine. You were to abolish military force, but you were first to bring all
commanding officers who had done their duty, to trial by court-martial for that offence, and shoot
them. You were to abolish war, but were to make converts by making war upon them, and
charging them with loving war as the apple of their eye. You were to have no capital punishment,
but were first to sweep off the face of the earth all legislators, jurists, and judges, who were of the
contrary opinion. You were to have universal concord, and were to get it by eliminating all the
people who wouldn't, or conscientiously couldn't, be concordant. You were to love your brother
as yourself, but after an indefinite interval of maligning him (very much as if you hated him), and
calling him all manner of names. Above all things, you were to do nothing in private, or on your
own account. You were to go to the offices of the Haven of Philanthropy, and put your name
down as a Member and a Professing Philanthropist. Then, you were to pay up your subscription,
get your card of membership and your riband and medal, and were evermore to live upon a
platform, and evermore to say what Mr. Honeythunder said, and what the Treasurer said, and what
the sub-Treasurer said, and what the Committee said, and what the sub-Committee said, and what
the Secretary said, and what the Vice-Secretary said. And this was usually said in the
unanimouslycarried resolution under hand and seal, to the effect: 'That this assembled Body of Professing
Philanthropists views, with indignant scorn and contempt, not unmixed with utter detestation and
loathing abhorrence' - in short, the baseness of all those who do not belong to it, and pledges itself
to make as many obnoxious statements as possible about them, without being at all particular as to
facts.
The dinner was a most doleful breakdown. The philanthropist deranged the symmetry of the table,
sat himself in the way of the waiting, blocked up the thoroughfare, and drove Mr. Tope (who
assisted the parlour-maid) to the verge of distraction by passing plates and dishes on, over his own
head. Nobody could talk to anybody, because he held forth to everybody at once, as if the
company had no individual existence, but were a Meeting. He impounded the Reverend Mr.
Septimus, as an official personage to be addressed, or kind of human peg to hang his oratorical hat
on, and fell into the exasperating habit, common among such orators, of impersonating him as a
wicked and weak opponent. Thus, he would ask: 'And will you, sir, now stultify yourself bytelling me' - and so forth, when the innocent man had not opened his lips, nor meant to open them.
Or he would say: 'Now see, sir, to what a position you are reduced. I will leave you no escape.
After exhausting all the resources of fraud and falsehood, during years upon years; after exhibiting
a combination of dastardly meanness with ensanguined daring, such as the world has not often
witnessed; you have now the hypocrisy to bend the knee before the most degraded of mankind, and
to sue and whine and howl for mercy!' Whereat the unfortunate Minor Canon would look, in part
indignant and in part perplexed; while his worthy mother sat bridling, with tears in her eyes, and
the remainder of the party lapsed into a sort of gelatinous state, in which there was no flavour or
solidity, and very little resistance.
But the gush of philanthropy that burst forth when the departure of Mr. Honeythunder began to
impend, must have been highly gratifying to the feelings of that distinguished man. His coffee
was produced, by the special activity of Mr. Tope, a full hour before he wanted it. Mr. Crisparkle
sat with his watch in his hand for about the same period, lest he should overstay his time. The
four young people were unanimous in believing that the Cathedral clock struck three-quarters,
when it actually struck but one. Miss Twinkleton estimated the distance to the omnibus at
five-and-twenty minutes' walk, when it was really five. The affectionate kindness of the whole
circle hustled him into his greatcoat, and shoved him out into the moonlight, as if he were a fugitive
traitor with whom they sympathised, and a troop of horse were at the back door. Mr. Crisparkle
and his new charge, who took him to the omnibus, were so fervent in their apprehensions of his
catching cold, that they shut him up in it instantly and left him, with still half-an-hour to spare.
CHAPTER VII - MORE CONFIDENCES THAN ONE
'I KNOW very little of that gentleman, sir,' said Neville to the Minor Canon as they turned back.
'You know very little of your guardian?' the Minor Canon repeated.
'Almost nothing!'
'How came he - ''To BE my guardian? I'll tell you, sir. I suppose you know that we come (my sister and I) from
Ceylon?'
'Indeed, no.'
'I wonder at that. We lived with a stepfather there. Our mother died there, when we were little
children. We have had a wretched existence. She made him our guardian, and he was a miserly
wretch who grudged us food to eat, and clothes to wear. At his death, he passed us over to this
man; for no better reason that I know of, than his being a friend or connexion of his, whose name
was always in print and catching his attention.'
'That was lately, I suppose?'
'Quite lately, sir. This stepfather of ours was a cruel brute as well as a grinding one. It is well he
died when he did, or I might have killed him.'
Mr. Crisparkle stopped short in the moonlight and looked at his hopeful pupil in consternation.
'I surprise you, sir?' he said, with a quick change to a submissive manner.
'You shock me; unspeakably shock me.'
The pupil hung his head for a little while, as they walked on, and then said: 'You never saw him
beat your sister. I have seen him beat mine, more than once or twice, and I never forgot it.'
'Nothing,' said Mr. Crisparkle, 'not even a beloved and beautiful sister's tears under dastardly
ill-usage;' he became less severe, in spite of himself, as his indignation rose; 'could justify those
horrible expressions that you used.'
'I am sorry I used them, and especially to you, sir. I beg to recall them. But permit me to set you
right on one point. You spoke of my sister's tears. My sister would have let him tear her to
pieces, before she would have let him believe that he could make her shed a tear.'
Mr. Crisparkle reviewed those mental notes of his, and was neither at all surprised to hear it, nor at
all disposed to question it.'Perhaps you will think it strange, sir,' - this was said in a hesitating voice - 'that I should so soon
ask you to allow me to confide in you, and to have the kindness to hear a word or two from me in
my defence?'
'Defence?' Mr. Crisparkle repeated. 'You are not on your defence, Mr. Neville.'
'I think I am, sir. At least I know I should be, if you were better acquainted with my character.'
'Well, Mr. Neville,' was the rejoinder. 'What if you leave me to find it out?'
'Since it is your pleasure, sir,' answered the young man, with a quick change in his manner to sullen
disappointment: 'since it is your pleasure to check me in my impulse, I must submit.'
There was that in the tone of this short speech which made the conscientious man to whom it was
addressed uneasy. It hinted to him that he might, without meaning it, turn aside a trustfulness
beneficial to a mis-shapen young mind and perhaps to his own power of directing and improving it.
They were within sight of the lights in his windows, and he stopped.
'Let us turn back and take a turn or two up and down, Mr. Neville, or you may not have time to
finish what you wish to say to me. You are hasty in thinking that I mean to check you. Quite the
contrary. I invite your confidence.'
'You have invited it, sir, without knowing it, ever since I came here. I say "ever since," as if I had
been here a week. The truth is, we came here (my sister and I) to quarrel with you, and affront
you, and break away again.'
'Really?' said Mr. Crisparkle, at a dead loss for anything else to say.
'You see, we could not know what you were beforehand, sir; could we?'
'Clearly not,' said Mr. Crisparkle.
'And having liked no one else with whom we have ever been brought into contact, we had made up
our minds not to like you.'
'Really?' said Mr. Crisparkle again.'But we do like you, sir, and we see an unmistakable difference between your house and your
reception of us, and anything else we have ever known. This - and my happening to be alone with
you - and everything around us seeming so quiet and peaceful after Mr. Honeythunder's departure -
and Cloisterham being so old and grave and beautiful, with the moon shining on it - these things
inclined me to open my heart.'
'I quite understand, Mr. Neville. And it is salutary to listen to such influences.'
'In describing my own imperfections, sir, I must ask you not to suppose that I am describing my
sister's. She has come out of the disadvantages of our miserable life, as much better than I am, as
that Cathedral tower is higher than those chimneys.'
Mr. Crisparkle in his own breast was not so sure of this.
'I have had, sir, from my earliest remembrance, to suppress a deadly and bitter hatred. This has
made me secret and revengeful. I have been always tyrannically held down by the strong hand.
This has driven me, in my weakness, to the resource of being false and mean. I have been stinted
of education, liberty, money, dress, the very necessaries of life, the commonest pleasures of
childhood, the commonest possessions of youth. This has caused me to be utterly wanting in I
don't know what emotions, or remembrances, or good instincts - I have not even a name for the
thing, you see! - that you have had to work upon in other young men to whom you have been
accustomed.'
'This is evidently true. But this is not encouraging,' thought Mr. Crisparkle as they turned again.
'And to finish with, sir: I have been brought up among abject and servile dependents, of an
inferior race, and I may easily have contracted some affinity with them. Sometimes, I don't know
but that it may be a drop of what is tigerish in their blood.'
'As in the case of that remark just now,' thought Mr. Crisparkle.
'In a last word of reference to my sister, sir (we are twin children), you ought to know, to her honour,
that nothing in our misery ever subdued her, though it often cowed me. When we ran away from
it (we ran away four times in six years, to be soon brought back and cruelly punished), the flight
was always of her planning and leading. Each time she dressed as a boy, and showed the daringof a man. I take it we were seven years old when we first decamped; but I remember, when I lost
the pocket-knife with which she was to have cut her hair short, how desperately she tried to tear it
out, or bite it off. I have nothing further to say, sir, except that I hope you will bear with me and
make allowance for me.'
'Of that, Mr. Neville, you may be sure,' returned the Minor Canon. 'I don't preach more than I can
help, and I will not repay your confidence with a sermon. But I entreat you to bear in mind, very
seriously and steadily, that if I am to do you any good, it can only be with your own assistance; and
that you can only render that, efficiently, by seeking aid from Heaven.'
'I will try to do my part, sir.'
'And, Mr. Neville, I will try to do mine. Here is my hand on it. May God bless our endeavours!'
They were now standing at his house-door, and a cheerful sound of voices and laughter was heard
within.
'We will take one more turn before going in,' said Mr. Crisparkle, 'for I want to ask you a question.
When you said you were in a changed mind concerning me, you spoke, not only for yourself, but
for your sister too?'
'Undoubtedly I did, sir.'
'Excuse me, Mr. Neville, but I think you have had no opportunity of communicating with your
sister, since I met you. Mr. Honeythunder was very eloquent; but perhaps I may venture to say,
without illnature, that he rather monopolised the occasion. May you not have answered for your sister
without sufficient warrant?'
Neville shook his head with a proud smile.
'You don't know, sir, yet, what a complete understanding can exist between my sister and me,
though no spoken word - perhaps hardly as much as a look - may have passed between us. She
not only feels as I have described, but she very well knows that I am taking this opportunity of
speaking to you, both for her and for myself.'Mr. Crisparkle looked in his face, with some incredulity; but his face expressed such absolute and
firm conviction of the truth of what he said, that Mr. Crisparkle looked at the pavement, and mused,
until they came to his door again.
'I will ask for one more turn, sir, this time,' said the young man, with a rather heightened colour
rising in his face. 'But for Mr. Honeythunder's - I think you called it eloquence, sir?' (somewhat
slyly.)
'I - yes, I called it eloquence,' said Mr. Crisparkle.
'But for Mr. Honeythunder's eloquence, I might have had no need to ask you what I am going to ask
you. This Mr. Edwin Drood, sir: I think that's the name?'
'Quite correct,' said Mr. Crisparkle. 'D-r-double o-d.'
'Does he - or did he - read with you, sir?'
'Never, Mr. Neville. He comes here visiting his relation, Mr. Jasper.'
'Is Miss Bud his relation too, sir?'
('Now, why should he ask that, with sudden superciliousness?' thought Mr. Crisparkle.) Then he
explained, aloud, what he knew of the little story of their betrothal.
'O! THAT'S it, is it?' said the young man. 'I understand his air of proprietorship now!'
This was said so evidently to himself, or to anybody rather than Mr. Crisparkle, that the latter
instinctively felt as if to notice it would be almost tantamount to noticing a passage in a letter which
he had read by chance over the writer's shoulder. A moment afterwards they re-entered the house.
Mr. Jasper was seated at the piano as they came into his drawingroom, and was accompanying Miss Rosebud while she sang. It was a consequence of his playing
the accompaniment without notes, and of her being a heedless little creature, very apt to go wrong,
that he followed her lips most attentively, with his eyes as well as hands; carefully and softly
hinting the key-note from time to time. Standing with an arm drawn round her, but with a face far
more intent on Mr. Jasper than on her singing, stood Helena, between whom and her brother aninstantaneous recognition passed, in which Mr. Crisparkle saw, or thought he saw, the
understanding that had been spoken of, flash out. Mr. Neville then took his admiring station,
leaning against the piano, opposite the singer; Mr. Crisparkle sat down by the china shepherdess;
Edwin Drood gallantly furled and unfurled Miss Twinkleton's fan; and that lady passively claimed
that sort of exhibitor's proprietorship in the accomplishment on view, which Mr. Tope, the Verger,
daily claimed in the Cathedral service.
The song went on. It was a sorrowful strain of parting, and the fresh young voice was very
plaintive and tender. As Jasper watched the pretty lips, and ever and again hinted the one note, as
though it were a low whisper from himself, the voice became less steady, until all at once the singer
broke into a burst of tears, and shrieked out, with her hands over her eyes: 'I can't bear this! I
am frightened! Take me away!'
With one swift turn of her lithe figures Helena laid the little beauty on a sofa, as if she had never
caught her up. Then, on one knee beside her, and with one hand upon her rosy mouth, while with
the other she appealed to all the rest, Helena said to them: 'It's nothing; it's all over; don't speak to
her for one minute, and she is well!'
Jasper's hands had, in the same instant, lifted themselves from the keys, and were now poised above
them, as though he waited to resume. In that attitude he yet sat quiet: not even looking round,
when all the rest had changed their places and were reassuring one another.
'Pussy's not used to an audience; that's the fact,' said Edwin Drood. 'She got nervous, and couldn't
hold out. Besides, Jack, you are such a conscientious master, and require so much, that I believe
you make her afraid of you. No wonder.'
'No wonder,' repeated Helena.
'There, Jack, you hear! You would be afraid of him, under similar circumstances, wouldn't you,
Miss Landless?'
'Not under any circumstances,' returned Helena.
Jasper brought down his hands, looked over his shoulder, and begged to thank Miss Landless for
her vindication of his character. Then he fell to dumbly playing, without striking the notes, while
his little pupil was taken to an open window for air, and was otherwise petted and restored. Whenshe was brought back, his place was empty. 'Jack's gone, Pussy,' Edwin told her. 'I am more than
half afraid he didn't like to be charged with being the Monster who had frightened you.' But she
answered never a word, and shivered, as if they had made her a little too cold.
Miss Twinkleton now opining that indeed these were late hours, Mrs. Crisparkle, for finding
ourselves outside the walls of the Nuns' House, and that we who undertook the formation of the
future wives and mothers of England (the last words in a lower voice, as requiring to be
communicated in confidence) were really bound (voice coming up again) to set a better example
than one of rakish habits, wrappers were put in requisition, and the two young cavaliers volunteered
to see the ladies home. It was soon done, and the gate of the Nuns' House closed upon them.
The boarders had retired, and only Mrs. Tisher in solitary vigil awaited the new pupil. Her
bedroom being within Rosa's, very little introduction or explanation was necessary, before she was
placed in charge of her new friend, and left for the night.
'This is a blessed relief, my dear,' said Helena. 'I have been dreading all day, that I should be
brought to bay at this time.'
'There are not many of us,' returned Rosa, 'and we are good-natured girls; at least the others are; I
can answer for them.'
'I can answer for you,' laughed Helena, searching the lovely little face with her dark, fiery eyes, and
tenderly caressing the small figure. 'You will be a friend to me, won't you?'
'I hope so. But the idea of my being a friend to you seems too absurd, though.'
'Why?'
'O, I am such a mite of a thing, and you are so womanly and handsome. You seem to have
resolution and power enough to crush me. I shrink into nothing by the side of your presence
even.'
'I am a neglected creature, my dear, unacquainted with all accomplishments, sensitively conscious
that I have everything to learn, and deeply ashamed to own my ignorance.'
'And yet you acknowledge everything to me!' said Rosa.'My pretty one, can I help it? There is a fascination in you.'
'O! is there though?' pouted Rosa, half in jest and half in earnest. 'What a pity Master Eddy
doesn't feel it more!'
Of course her relations towards that young gentleman had been already imparted in Minor Canon
Corner.
'Why, surely he must love you with all his heart!' cried Helena, with an earnestness that threatened
to blaze into ferocity if he didn't.
'Eh? O, well, I suppose he does,' said Rosa, pouting again; 'I am sure I have no right to say he
doesn't. Perhaps it's my fault. Perhaps I am not as nice to him as I ought to be. I don't think I
am. But it IS so ridiculous!'
Helena's eyes demanded what was.
'WE are,' said Rosa, answering as if she had spoken. 'We are such a ridiculous couple. And we
are always quarrelling.'
'Why?'
'Because we both know we are ridiculous, my dear!' Rosa gave that answer as if it were the most
conclusive answer in the world.
Helena's masterful look was intent upon her face for a few moments, and then she impulsively put
out both her hands and said:
'You will be my friend and help me?'
'Indeed, my dear, I will,' replied Rosa, in a tone of affectionate childishness that went straight and
true to her heart; 'I will be as good a friend as such a mite of a thing can be to such a noble creature
as you. And be a friend to me, please; I don't understand myself: and I want a friend who can
understand me, very much indeed.'Helena Landless kissed her, and retaining both her hands said:
'Who is Mr. Jasper?'
Rosa turned aside her head in answering: 'Eddy's uncle, and my music-master.'
'You do not love him?'
'Ugh!' She put her hands up to her face, and shook with fear or horror.
'You know that he loves you?'
'O, don't, don't, don't!' cried Rosa, dropping on her knees, and clinging to her new resource. 'Don't
tell me of it! He terrifies me. He haunts my thoughts, like a dreadful ghost. I feel that I am
never safe from him. I feel as if he could pass in through the wall when he is spoken of.' She
actually did look round, as if she dreaded to see him standing in the shadow behind her.
'Try to tell me more about it, darling.'
'Yes, I will, I will. Because you are so strong. But hold me the while, and stay with me
afterwards.'
'My child! You speak as if he had threatened you in some dark way.'
'He has never spoken to me about - that. Never.'
'What has he done?'
'He has made a slave of me with his looks. He has forced me to understand him, without his
saying a word; and he has forced me to keep silence, without his uttering a threat. When I play, he
never moves his eyes from my hands. When I sing, he never moves his eyes from my lips.
When he corrects me, and strikes a note, or a chord, or plays a passage, he himself is in the sounds,
whispering that he pursues me as a lover, and commanding me to keep his secret. I avoid his eyes,
but he forces me to see them without looking at them. Even when a glaze comes over them
(which is sometimes the case), and he seems to wander away into a frightful sort of dream in which
he threatens most, he obliges me to know it, and to know that he is sitting close at my side, moreterrible to me than ever.'
'What is this imagined threatening, pretty one? What is threatened?'
'I don't know. I have never even dared to think or wonder what it is.'
'And was this all, to-night?'
'This was all; except that to-night when he watched my lips so closely as I was singing, besides
feeling terrified I felt ashamed and passionately hurt. It was as if he kissed me, and I couldn't bear
it, but cried out. You must never breathe this to any one. Eddy is devoted to him. But you said
to-night that you would not be afraid of him, under any circumstances, and that gives me - who am
so much afraid of him - courage to tell only you. Hold me! Stay with me! I am too frightened
to be left by myself.'
The lustrous gipsy-face drooped over the clinging arms and bosom, and the wild black hair fell
down protectingly over the childish form. There was a slumbering gleam of fire in the intense
dark eyes, though they were then softened with compassion and admiration. Let whomsoever it
most concerned look well to it!
CHAPTER VIII - DAGGERS DRAWN
THE two young men, having seen the damsels, their charges, enter the courtyard of the Nuns'
House, and finding themselves coldly stared at by the brazen door-plate, as if the battered old beau
with the glass in his eye were insolent, look at one another, look along the perspective of the
moonlit street, and slowly walk away together.
'Do you stay here long, Mr. Drood?' says Neville.
'Not this time,' is the careless answer. 'I leave for London again, to-morrow. But I shall be here,off and on, until next Midsummer; then I shall take my leave of Cloisterham, and England too; for
many a long day, I expect.'
'Are you going abroad?'
'Going to wake up Egypt a little,' is the condescending answer.
'Are you reading?'
'Reading?' repeats Edwin Drood, with a touch of contempt. 'No. Doing, working, engineering.
My small patrimony was left a part of the capital of the Firm I am with, by my father, a former
partner; and I am a charge upon the Firm until I come of age; and then I step into my modest share
in the concern. Jack - you met him at dinner - is, until then, my guardian and trustee.'
'I heard from Mr. Crisparkle of your other good fortune.'
'What do you mean by my other good fortune?'
Neville has made his remark in a watchfully advancing, and yet furtive and shy manner, very
expressive of that peculiar air already noticed, of being at once hunter and hunted. Edwin has
made his retort with an abruptness not at all polite. They stop and interchange a rather heated
look.
'I hope,' says Neville, 'there is no offence, Mr. Drood, in my innocently referring to your betrothal?'
'By George!' cries Edwin, leading on again at a somewhat quicker pace; 'everybody in this
chattering old Cloisterham refers to it I wonder no public-house has been set up, with my portrait
for the sign of The Betrothed's Head. Or Pussy's portrait. One or the other.'
'I am not accountable for Mr. Crisparkle's mentioning the matter to me, quite openly,' Neville
begins.
'No; that's true; you are not,' Edwin Drood assents.
'But,' resumes Neville, 'I am accountable for mentioning it to you. And I did so, on the
supposition that you could not fail to be highly proud of it.'Now, there are these two curious touches of human nature working the secret springs of this
dialogue. Neville Landless is already enough impressed by Little Rosebud, to feel indignant that
Edwin Drood (far below her) should hold his prize so lightly. Edwin Drood is already enough
impressed by Helena, to feel indignant that Helena's brother (far below her) should dispose of him
so coolly, and put him out of the way so entirely.
However, the last remark had better be answered. So, says Edwin:
'I don't know, Mr. Neville' (adopting that mode of address from Mr. Crisparkle), 'that what people
are proudest of, they usually talk most about; I don't know either, that what they are proudest of,
they most like other people to talk about. But I live a busy life, and I speak under correction by
you readers, who ought to know everything, and I daresay do.'
By this time they had both become savage; Mr. Neville out in the open; Edwin Drood under the
transparent cover of a popular tune, and a stop now and then to pretend to admire picturesque
effects in the moonlight before him.
'It does not seem to me very civil in you,' remarks Neville, at length, 'to reflect upon a stranger who
comes here, not having had your advantages, to try to make up for lost time. But, to be sure, I was
not brought up in "busy life," and my ideas of civility were formed among Heathens.'
'Perhaps, the best civility, whatever kind of people we are brought up among,' retorts Edwin Drood,
'is to mind our own business. If you will set me that example, I promise to follow it.'
'Do you know that you take a great deal too much upon yourself?' is the angry rejoinder, 'and that in
the part of the world I come from, you would be called to account for it?'
'By whom, for instance?' asks Edwin Drood, coming to a halt, and surveying the other with a look
of disdain.
But, here a startling right hand is laid on Edwin's shoulder, and Jasper stands between them. For,
it would seem that he, too, has strolled round by the Nuns' House, and has come up behind them on
the shadowy side of the road.
'Ned, Ned, Ned!' he says; 'we must have no more of this. I don't like this. I have overheard highwords between you two. Remember, my dear boy, you are almost in the position of host to-night.
You belong, as it were, to the place, and in a manner represent it towards a stranger. Mr. Neville is
a stranger, and you should respect the obligations of hospitality. And, Mr. Neville,' laying his left
hand on the inner shoulder of that young gentleman, and thus walking on between them, hand to
shoulder on either side: 'you will pardon me; but I appeal to you to govern your temper too.
Now, what is amiss? But why ask! Let there be nothing amiss, and the question is superfluous.
We are all three on a good understanding, are we not?'
After a silent struggle between the two young men who shall speak last, Edwin Drood strikes in
with: 'So far as I am concerned, Jack, there is no anger in me.'
'Nor in me,' says Neville Landless, though not so freely; or perhaps so carelessly. 'But if Mr.
Drood knew all that lies behind me, far away from here, he might know better how it is that sharpedged words have sharp edges to wound me.'
'Perhaps,' says Jasper, in a soothing manner, 'we had better not qualify our good understanding.
We had better not say anything having the appearance of a remonstrance or condition; it might not
seem generous. Frankly and freely, you see there is no anger in Ned. Frankly and freely, there is
no anger in you, Mr. Neville?'
'None at all, Mr. Jasper.' Still, not quite so frankly or so freely; or, be it said once again, not quite
so carelessly perhaps.
'All over then! Now, my bachelor gatehouse is a few yards from here, and the heater is on the fire,
and the wine and glasses are on the table, and it is not a stone's throw from Minor Canon Corner.
Ned, you are up and away to-morrow. We will carry Mr. Neville in with us, to take a stirrup-cup.'
'With all my heart, Jack.'
'And with all mine, Mr. Jasper.' Neville feels it impossible to say less, but would rather not go.
He has an impression upon him that he has lost hold of his temper; feels that Edwin Drood's
coolness, so far from being infectious, makes him red-hot.
Mr. Jasper, still walking in the centre, hand to shoulder on either side, beautifully turns the Refrain
of a drinking song, and they all go up to his rooms. There, the first object visible, when he adds
the light of a lamp to that of the fire, is the portrait over the chimneypicce. It is not an objectcalculated to improve the understanding between the two young men, as rather awkwardly reviving
the subject of their difference. Accordingly, they both glance at it consciously, but say nothing.
Jasper, however (who would appear from his conduct to have gained but an imperfect clue to the
cause of their late high words), directly calls attention to it.
'You recognise that picture, Mr. Neville?' shading the lamp to throw the light upon it.
'I recognise it, but it is far from flattering the original.'
'O, you are hard upon it! It was done by Ned, who made me a present of it.'
'I am sorry for that, Mr. Drood.' Neville apologises, with a real intention to apologise; 'if I had
known I was in the artist's presence - '
'O, a joke, sir, a mere joke,' Edwin cuts in, with a provoking yawn. 'A little humouring of Pussy's
points! I'm going to paint her gravely, one of these days, if she's good.'
The air of leisurely patronage and indifference with which this is said, as the speaker throws
himself back in a chair and clasps his hands at the back of his head, as a rest for it, is very
exasperating to the excitable and excited Neville. Jasper looks observantly from the one to the
other, slightly smiles, and turns his back to mix a jug of mulled wine at the fire. It seems to
require much mixing and compounding.
'I suppose, Mr. Neville,' says Edwin, quick to resent the indignant protest against himself in the face
of young Landless, which is fully as visible as the portrait, or the fire, or the lamp: 'I suppose that
if you painted the picture of your lady love - '
'I can't paint,' is the hasty interruption.
'That's your misfortune, and not your fault. You would if you could. But if you could, I suppose
you would make her (no matter what she was in reality), Juno, Minerva, Diana, and Venus, all in
one. Eh?'
'I have no lady love, and I can't say.'
'If I were to try my hand,' says Edwin, with a boyish boastfulness getting up in him, 'on a portrait ofMiss Landless - in earnest, mind you; in earnest - you should see what I could do!'
'My sister's consent to sit for it being first got, I suppose? As it never will be got, I am afraid I
shall never see what you can do. I must bear the loss.'
Jasper turns round from the fire, fills a large goblet glass for Neville, fills a large goblet glass for
Edwin, and hands each his own; then fills for himself, saying:
'Come, Mr. Neville, we are to drink to my nephew, Ned. As it is his foot that is in the stirrup -
metaphorically - our stirrup-cup is to be devoted to him. Ned, my dearest fellow, my love!'
Jasper sets the example of nearly emptying his glass, and Neville follows it. Edwin Drood says,
'Thank you both very much,' and follows the double example.
'Look at him,' cries Jasper, stretching out his hand admiringly and tenderly, though rallyingly too.
'See where he lounges so easily, Mr. Neville! The world is all before him where to choose. A
life of stirring work and interest, a life of change and excitement, a life of domestic ease and love!
Look at him!'
Edwin Drood's face has become quickly and remarkably flushed with the wine; so has the face of
Neville Landless. Edwin still sits thrown back in his chair, making that rest of clasped hands for
his head.
'See how little he heeds it all!' Jasper proceeds in a bantering vein. 'It is hardly worth his while
to pluck the golden fruit that hangs ripe on the tree for him. And yet consider the contrast, Mr.
Neville. You and I have no prospect of stirring work and interest, or of change and excitement, or
of domestic ease and love. You and I have no prospect (unless you are more fortunate than I am,
which may easily be), but the tedious unchanging round of this dull place.'
'Upon my soul, Jack,' says Edwin, complacently, 'I feel quite apologetic for having my way
smoothed as you describe. But you know what I know, Jack, and it may not be so very easy as it
seems, after all. May it, Pussy?' To the portrait, with a snap of his thumb and finger. 'We have
got to hit it off yet; haven't we, Pussy? You know what I mean, Jack.'
His speech has become thick and indistinct. Jasper, quiet and self-possessed, looks to Neville, as
expecting his answer or comment. When Neville speaks, HIS speech is also thick and indistinct.'It might have been better for Mr. Drood to have known some hardships,' he says, defiantly.
'Pray,' retorts Edwin, turning merely his eyes in that direction, 'pray why might it have been better
for Mr. Drood to have known some hardships?'
'Ay,' Jasper assents, with an air of interest; 'let us know why?'
'Because they might have made him more sensible,' says Neville, 'of good fortune that is not by any
means necessarily the result of his own merits.'
Mr. Jasper quickly looks to his nephew for his rejoinder.
'Have YOU known hardships, may I ask?' says Edwin Drood, sitting upright.
Mr. Jasper quickly looks to the other for his retort.
'I have.'
'And what have they made you sensible of?'
Mr. Jasper's play of eyes between the two holds good throughout the dialogue, to the end.
'I have told you once before to-night.'
'You have done nothing of the sort.'
'I tell you I have. That you take a great deal too much upon yourself.'
'You added something else to that, if I remember?'
'Yes, I did say something else.'
'Say it again.'
'I said that in the part of the world I come from, you would be called to account for it.''Only there?' cries Edwin Drood, with a contemptuous laugh. 'A long way off, I believe? Yes; I
see! That part of the world is at a safe distance.'
'Say here, then,' rejoins the other, rising in a fury. 'Say anywhere! Your vanity is intolerable,
your conceit is beyond endurance; you talk as if you were some rare and precious prize, instead of a
common boaster. You are a common fellow, and a common boaster.'
'Pooh, pooh,' says Edwin Drood, equally furious, but more collected; 'how should you know? You
may know a black common fellow, or a black common boaster, when you see him (and no doubt
you have a large acquaintance that way); but you are no judge of white men.'
This insulting allusion to his dark skin infuriates Neville to that violent degree, that he flings the
dregs of his wine at Edwin Drood, and is in the act of flinging the goblet after it, when his arm is
caught in the nick of time by Jasper.
'Ned, my dear fellow!' he cries in a loud voice; 'I entreat you, I command you, to be still!' There
has been a rush of all the three, and a clattering of glasses and overturning of chairs. 'Mr. Neville,
for shame! Give this glass to me. Open your hand, sir. I WILL have it!'
But Neville throws him off, and pauses for an instant, in a raging passion, with the goblet yet in his
uplifted hand. Then, he dashes it down under the grate, with such force that the broken splinters
fly out again in a shower; and he leaves the house.
When he first emerges into the night air, nothing around him is still or steady; nothing around him
shows like what it is; he only knows that he stands with a bare head in the midst of a blood-red
whirl, waiting to be struggled with, and to struggle to the death.
But, nothing happening, and the moon looking down upon him as if he were dead after a fit of
wrath, he holds his steam-hammer beating head and heart, and staggers away. Then, he becomes
half-conscious of having heard himself bolted and barred out, like a dangerous animal; and thinks
what shall he do?
Some wildly passionate ideas of the river dissolve under the spell of the moonlight on the Cathedral
and the graves, and the remembrance of his sister, and the thought of what he owes to the good man
who has but that very day won his confidence and given him his pledge. He repairs to MinorCanon Corner, and knocks softly at the door.
It is Mr. Crisparkle's custom to sit up last of the early household, very softly touching his piano and
practising his favourite parts in concerted vocal music. The south wind that goes where it lists, by
way of Minor Canon Corner on a still night, is not more subdued than Mr. Crisparkle at such times,
regardful of the slumbers of the china shepherdess.
His knock is immediately answered by Mr. Crisparkle himself. When he opens the door, candle in
hand, his cheerful face falls, and disappointed amazement is in it.
'Mr. Neville! In this disorder! Where have you been?'
'I have been to Mr. Jasper's, sir. With his nephew.'
'Come in.'
The Minor Canon props him by the elbow with a strong hand (in a strictly scientific manner,
worthy of his morning trainings), and turns him into his own little book-room, and shuts the door.'
'I have begun ill, sir. I have begun dreadfully ill.'
'Too true. You are not sober, Mr. Neville.'
'I am afraid I am not, sir, though I can satisfy you at another time that I have had a very little indeed
to drink, and that it overcame me in the strangest and most sudden manner.'
'Mr. Neville, Mr. Neville,' says the Minor Canon, shaking his head with a sorrowful smile; 'I have
heard that said before.'
'I think - my mind is much confused, but I think - it is equally true of Mr. Jasper's nephew, sir.'
'Very likely,' is the dry rejoinder.
'We quarrelled, sir. He insulted me most grossly. He had heated that tigerish blood I told you of
to-day, before then.''Mr. Neville,' rejoins the Minor Canon, mildly, but firmly: 'I request you not to speak to me with
that clenched right hand. Unclench it, if you please.'
'He goaded me, sir,' pursues the young man, instantly obeying, 'beyond my power of endurance. I
cannot say whether or no he meant it at first, but he did it. He certainly meant it at last. In short,
sir,' with an irrepressible outburst, 'in the passion into which he lashed me, I would have cut him
down if I could, and I tried to do it.'
'You have clenched that hand again,' is Mr. Crisparkle's quiet commentary.
'I beg your pardon, sir.'
'You know your room, for I showed it you before dinner; but I will accompany you to it once more.
Your arm, if you please. Softly, for the house is all a-bed.'
Scooping his hand into the same scientific elbow-rest as before, and backing it up with the inert
strength of his arm, as skilfully as a Police Expert, and with an apparent repose quite unattainable
by novices, Mr. Crisparkle conducts his pupil to the pleasant and orderly old room prepared for him.
Arrived there, the young man throws himself into a chair, and, flinging his arms upon his
reading-table, rests his head upon them with an air of wretched self-reproach.
The gentle Minor Canon has had it in his thoughts to leave the room, without a word. But looking
round at the door, and seeing this dejected figure, he turns back to it, touches it with a mild hand,
says 'Good night!' A sob is his only acknowledgment. He might have had many a worse;
perhaps, could have had few better.
Another soft knock at the outer door attracts his attention as he goes down-stairs. He opens it to
Mr. Jasper, holding in his hand the pupil's hat.
'We have had an awful scene with him,' says Jasper, in a low voice.
'Has it been so bad as that?'
'Murderous!'
Mr. Crisparkle remonstrates: 'No, no, no. Do not use such strong words.''He might have laid my dear boy dead at my feet. It is no fault of his, that he did not. But that I
was, through the mercy of God, swift and strong with him, he would have cut him down on my
hearth.'
The phrase smites home. 'Ah!' thinks Mr. Crisparkle, 'his own words!'
'Seeing what I have seen to-night, and hearing what I have heard,' adds Jasper, with great
earnestness, 'I shall never know peace of mind when there is danger of those two coming together,
with no one else to interfere. It was horrible. There is something of the tiger in his dark blood.'
'Ah!' thinks Mr. Crisparkle, 'so he said!'
'You, my dear sir,' pursues Jasper, taking his hand, 'even you, have accepted a dangerous charge.'
'You need have no fear for me, Jasper,' returns Mr. Crisparkle, with a quiet smile. 'I have none for
myself.'
'I have none for myself,' returns Jasper, with an emphasis on the last pronoun, 'because I am not,
nor am I in the way of being, the object of his hostility. But you may be, and my dear boy has
been. Good night!'
Mr. Crisparkle goes in, with the hat that has so easily, so almost imperceptibly, acquired the right to
be hung up in his hall; hangs it up; and goes thoughtfully to bed.
CHAPTER IX - BIRDS IN THE BUSH
ROSA, having no relation that she knew of in the world, had, from the seventh year of her age,
known no home but the Nuns' House, and no mother but Miss Twinkleton. Her remembrance of
her own mother was of a pretty little creature like herself (not much older than herself it seemed to
her), who had been brought home in her father's arms, drowned. The fatal accident had happenedat a party of pleasure. Every fold and colour in the pretty summer dress, and even the long wet
hair, with scattered petals of ruined flowers still clinging to it, as the dead young figure, in its sad,
sad beauty lay upon the bed, were fixed indelibly in Rosa's recollection. So were the wild despair
and the subsequent bowed-down grief of her poor young father, who died broken-hearted on the
first anniversary of that hard day.
The betrothal of Rosa grew out of the soothing of his year of mental distress by his fast friend and
old college companion, Drood: who likewise had been left a widower in his youth. But he, too,
went the silent road into which all earthly pilgrimages merge, some sooner, and some later; and
thus the young couple had come to be as they were.
The atmosphere of pity surrounding the little orphan girl when she first came to Cloisterham, had
never cleared away. It had taken brighter hues as she grew older, happier, prettier; now it had
been golden, now roseate, and now azure; but it had always adorned her with some soft light of its
own. The general desire to console and caress her, had caused her to be treated in the beginning
as a child much younger than her years; the same desire had caused her to be still petted when she
was a child no longer. Who should be her favourite, who should anticipate this or that small
present, or do her this or that small service; who should take her home for the holidays; who should
write to her the oftenest when they were separated, and whom she would most rejoice to see again
when they were reunited; even these gentle rivalries were not without their slight dashes of
bitterness in the Nuns' House. Well for the poor Nuns in their day, if they hid no harder strife
under their veils and rosaries!
Thus Rosa had grown to be an amiable, giddy, wilful, winning little creature; spoilt, in the sense of
counting upon kindness from all around her; but not in the sense of repaying it with indifference.
Possessing an exhaustless well of affection in her nature, its sparkling waters had freshened and
brightened the Nuns' House for years, and yet its depths had never yet been moved: what might
betide when that came to pass; what developing changes might fall upon the heedless head, and
light heart, then; remained to be seen.
By what means the news that there had been a quarrel between the two young men overnight,
involving even some kind of onslaught by Mr. Neville upon Edwin Drood, got into Miss
Twinkleton's establishment before breakfast, it is impossible to say. Whether it was brought in by
the birds of the air, or came blowing in with the very air itself, when the casement windows were
set open; whether the baker brought it kneaded into the bread, or the milkman delivered it as part of
the adulteration of his milk; or the housemaids, beating the dust out of their mats against thegateposts, received it in exchange deposited on the mats by the town atmosphere; certain it is that
the news permeated every gable of the old building before Miss Twinkleton was down, and that
Miss Twinkleton herself received it through Mrs. Tisher, while yet in the act of dressing; or (as she
might have expressed the phrase to a parent or guardian of a mythological turn) of sacrificing to the
Graces.
Miss Landless's brother had thrown a bottle at Mr. Edwin Drood.
Miss Landless's brother had thrown a knife at Mr. Edwin Drood.
A knife became suggestive of a fork; and Miss Landless's brother had thrown a fork at Mr. Edwin
Drood.
As in the governing precedence of Peter Piper, alleged to have picked the peck of pickled pepper, it
was held physically desirable to have evidence of the existence of the peck of pickled pepper which
Peter Piper was alleged to have picked; so, in this case, it was held psychologically important to
know why Miss Landless's brother threw a bottle, knife, or fork-or bottle, knife, AND fork - for the
cook had been given to understand it was all three - at Mr. Edwin Drood?
Well, then. Miss Landless's brother had said he admired Miss Bud. Mr. Edwin Drood had said
to Miss Landless's brother that he had no business to admire Miss Bud. Miss Landless's brother
had then 'up'd' (this was the cook's exact information) with the bottle, knife, fork, and decanter (the
decanter now coolly flying at everybody's head, without the least introduction), and thrown them
all at Mr. Edwin Drood.
Poor little Rosa put a forefinger into each of her ears when these rumours began to circulate, and
retired into a corner, beseeching not to be told any more; but Miss Landless, begging permission of
Miss Twinkleton to go and speak with her brother, and pretty plainly showing that she would take it
if it were not given, struck out the more definite course of going to Mr. Crisparkle's for accurate
intelligence.
When she came back (being first closeted with Miss Twinkleton, in order that anything
objectionable in her tidings might be retained by that discreet filter), she imparted to Rosa only,
what had taken place; dwelling with a flushed cheek on the provocation her brother had received,
but almost limiting it to that last gross affront as crowning 'some other words between them,' and,
out of consideration for her new friend, passing lightly over the fact that the other words hadoriginated in her lover's taking things in general so very easily. To Rosa direct, she brought a
petition from her brother that she would forgive him; and, having delivered it with sisterly
earnestness, made an end of the subject.
It was reserved for Miss Twinkleton to tone down the public mind of the Nuns' House. That lady,
therefore, entering in a stately manner what plebeians might have called the school-room, but what,
in the patrician language of the head of the Nuns' House, was euphuistically, not to say
round-aboutedly, denominated 'the apartment allotted to study,' and saying with a forensic air,
'Ladies!' all rose. Mrs. Tisher at the same time grouped herself behind her chief, as representing
Queen Elizabeth's first historical female friend at Tilbury fort. Miss Twinkleton then proceeded to
remark that Rumour, Ladies, had been represented by the bard of Avon - needless were it to
mention the immortal SHAKESPEARE, also called the Swan of his native river, not improbably
with some reference to the ancient superstition that that bird of graceful plumage (Miss Jennings
will please stand upright) sang sweetly on the approach of death, for which we have no
ornithological authority, - Rumour, Ladies, had been represented by that bard - hem! - 'who drew
The celebrated Jew,'
as painted full of tongues. Rumour in Cloisterham (Miss Ferdinand will honour me with her
attention) was no exception to the great limner's portrait of Rumour elsewhere. A slight FRACAS
between two young gentlemen occurring last night within a hundred miles of these peaceful walls
(Miss Ferdinand, being apparently incorrigible, will have the kindness to write out this evening, in
the original language, the first four fables of our vivacious neighbour, Monsieur La Fontaine) had
been very grossly exaggerated by Rumour's voice. In the first alarm and anxiety arising from our
sympathy with a sweet young friend, not wholly to be dissociated from one of the gladiators in the
bloodless arena in question (the impropriety of Miss Reynolds's appearing to stab herself in the
hand with a pin, is far too obvious, and too glaringly unladylike, to be pointed out), we descended
from our maiden elevation to discuss this uncongenial and this unfit theme. Responsible inquiries
having assured us that it was but one of those 'airy nothings' pointed at by the Poet (whose name
and date of birth Miss Giggles will supply within half an hour), we would now discard the subject,
and concentrate our minds upon the grateful labours of the day.
But the subject so survived all day, nevertheless, that Miss Ferdinand got into new trouble by
surreptitiously clapping on a paper moustache at dinner-time, and going through the motions of
aiming a water-bottle at Miss Giggles, who drew a table-spoon in defence.
Now, Rosa thought of this unlucky quarrel a great deal, and thought of it with an uncomfortablefeeling that she was involved in it, as cause, or consequence, or what not, through being in a false
position altogether as to her marriage engagement. Never free from such uneasiness when she
was with her affianced husband, it was not likely that she would be free from it when they were
apart. Today, too, she was cast in upon herself, and deprived of the relief of talking freely with her new
friend, because the quarrel had been with Helena's brother, and Helena undisguisedly avoided the
subject as a delicate and difficult one to herself. At this critical time, of all times, Rosa's guardian
was announced as having come to see her.
Mr. Grewgious had been well selected for his trust, as a man of incorruptible integrity, but certainly
for no other appropriate quality discernible on the surface. He was an arid, sandy man, who, if he
had been put into a grinding-mill, looked as if he would have ground immediately into high-dried
snuff. He had a scanty flat crop of hair, in colour and consistency like some very mangy yellow
fur tippet; it was so unlike hair, that it must have been a wig, but for the stupendous improbability
of anybody's voluntarily sporting such a head. The little play of feature that his face presented,
was cut deep into it, in a few hard curves that made it more like work; and he had certain notches in
his forehead, which looked as though Nature had been about to touch them into sensibility or
refinement, when she had impatiently thrown away the chisel, and said: 'I really cannot be
worried to finish off this man; let him go as he is.'
With too great length of throat at his upper end, and too much ankle-bone and heel at his lower;
with an awkward and hesitating manner; with a shambling walk; and with what is called a near
sight - which perhaps prevented his observing how much white cotton stocking he displayed to the
public eye, in contrast with his black suit - Mr. Grewgious still had some strange capacity in him of
making on the whole an agreeable impression.
Mr. Grewgious was discovered by his ward, much discomfited by being in Miss Twinkleton's
company in Miss Twinkleton's own sacred room. Dim forebodings of being examined in
something, and not coming well out of it, seemed to oppress the poor gentleman when found in
these circumstances.
'My dear, how do you do? I am glad to see you. My dear, how much improved you are. Permit
me to hand you a chair, my dear.'
Miss Twinkleton rose at her little writing-table, saying, with general sweetness, as to the polite
Universe: 'Will you permit me to retire?''By no means, madam, on my account. I beg that you will not move.'
'I must entreat permission to MOVE,' returned Miss Twinkleton, repeating the word with a
charming grace; 'but I will not withdraw, since you are so obliging. If I wheel my desk to this
corner window, shall I be in the way?'
'Madam! In the way!'
'You are very kind. - Rosa, my dear, you will be under no restraint, I am sure.'
Here Mr. Grewgious, left by the fire with Rosa, said again: 'My dear, how do you do? I am glad
to see you, my dear.' And having waited for her to sit down, sat down himself.
'My visits,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'are, like those of the angels - not that I compare myself to an
angel.'
'No, sir,' said Rosa.
'Not by any means,' assented Mr. Grewgious. 'I merely refer to my visits, which are few and far
between. The angels are, we know very well, up-stairs.'
Miss Twinkleton looked round with a kind of stiff stare.
'I refer, my dear,' said Mr. Grewgious, laying his hand on Rosa's, as the possibility thrilled through
his frame of his otherwise seeming to take the awful liberty of calling Miss Twinkleton my dear; 'I
refer to the other young ladies.'
Miss Twinkleton resumed her writing.
Mr. Grewgious, with a sense of not having managed his opening point quite as neatly as he might
have desired, smoothed his head from back to front as if he had just dived, and were pressing the
water out - this smoothing action, however superfluous, was habitual with him - and took a
pocket-book from his coat-pocket, and a stump of black-lead pencil from his waistcoat-pocket.
'I made,' he said, turning the leaves: 'I made a guiding memorandum or so - as I usually do, for Ihave no conversational powers whatever - to which I will, with your permission, my dear, refer.
"Well and happy." Truly. You are well and happy, my dear? You look so.'
'Yes, indeed, sir,' answered Rosa.
'For which,' said Mr. Grewgious, with a bend of his head towards the corner window, 'our warmest
acknowledgments are due, and I am sure are rendered, to the maternal kindness and the constant
care and consideration of the lady whom I have now the honour to see before me.'
This point, again, made but a lame departure from Mr. Grewgious, and never got to its destination;
for, Miss Twinkleton, feeling that the courtesies required her to be by this time quite outside the
conversation, was biting the end of her pen, and looking upward, as waiting for the descent of an
idea from any member of the Celestial Nine who might have one to spare.
Mr. Grewgious smoothed his smooth head again, and then made another reference to his
pocket-book; lining out 'well and happy,' as disposed of.
'"Pounds, shillings, and pence," is my next note. A dry subject for a young lady, but an important
subject too. Life is pounds, shillings, and pence. Death is - ' A sudden recollection of the
death of her two parents seemed to stop him, and he said in a softer tone, and evidently inserting
the negative as an afterthought: 'Death is NOT pounds, shillings, and pence.'
His voice was as hard and dry as himself, and Fancy might have ground it straight, like himself,
into high-dried snuff. And yet, through the very limited means of expression that he possessed, he
seemed to express kindness. If Nature had but finished him off, kindness might have been
recognisable in his face at this moment. But if the notches in his forehead wouldn't fuse together,
and if his face would work and couldn't play, what could he do, poor man!
'"Pounds, shillings, and pence." You find your allowance always sufficient for your wants, my
dear?'
Rosa wanted for nothing, and therefore it was ample.
'And you are not in debt?'Rosa laughed at the idea of being in debt. It seemed, to her inexperience, a comical vagary of the
imagination. Mr. Grewgious stretched his near sight to be sure that this was her view of the case.
'Ah!' he said, as comment, with a furtive glance towards Miss Twinkleton, and lining out pounds,
shillings, and pence: 'I spoke of having got among the angels! So I did!'
Rosa felt what his next memorandum would prove to be, and was blushing and folding a crease in
her dress with one embarrassed hand, long before he found it.
'"Marriage." Hem!' Mr. Grewgious carried his smoothing hand down over his eyes and nose,
and even chin, before drawing his chair a little nearer, and speaking a little more confidentially: 'I
now touch, my dear, upon the point that is the direct cause of my troubling you with the present
visit. Othenwise, being a particularly Angular man, I should not have intruded here. I am the
last man to intrude into a sphere for which I am so entirely unfitted. I feel, on these premises, as if
I was a bear - with the cramp - in a youthful Cotillon.'
His ungainliness gave him enough of the air of his simile to set Rosa off laughing heartily.
'It strikes you in the same light,' said Mr. Grewgious, with perfect calmness. 'Just so. To return
to my memorandum. Mr. Edwin has been to and fro here, as was arranged. You have mentioned
that, in your quarterly letters to me. And you like him, and he likes you.'
'I LIKE him very much, sir,' rejoined Rosa.
'So I said, my dear,' returned her guardian, for whose ear the timid emphasis was much too fine.
'Good. And you correspond.'
'We write to one another,' said Rosa, pouting, as she recalled their epistolary differences.
'Such is the meaning that I attach to the word "correspond" in this application, my dear,' said Mr.
Grewgious. 'Good. All goes well, time works on, and at this next Christmas-time it will become
necessary, as a matter of form, to give the exemplary lady in the corner window, to whom we are so
much indebted, business notice of your departure in the ensuing half-year. Your relations with her
are far more than business relations, no doubt; but a residue of business remains in them, and
business is business ever. I am a particularly Angular man,' proceeded Mr. Grewgious, as if it
suddenly occurred to him to mention it, 'and I am not used to give anything away. If, for these
two reasons, some competent Proxy would give YOU away, I should take it very kindly.'Rosa intimated, with her eyes on the ground, that she thought a substitute might be found, if
required.
'Surely, surely,' said Mr. Grewgious. 'For instance, the gentleman who teaches Dancing here - he
would know how to do it with graceful propriety. He would advance and retire in a manner
satisfactory to the feelings of the officiating clergyman, and of yourself, and the bridegroom, and
all parties concerned. I am - I am a particularly Angular man,' said Mr. Grewgious, as if he had
made up his mind to screw it out at last: 'and should only blunder.'
Rosa sat still and silent. Perhaps her mind had not got quite so far as the ceremony yet, but was
lagging on the way there.
'Memorandum, "Will." Now, my dear,' said Mr. Grewgious, referring to his notes, disposing of
'Marriage' with his pencil, and taking a paper from his pocket; 'although. I have before possessed
you with the contents of your father's will, I think it right at this time to leave a certified copy of it
in your hands. And although Mr. Edwin is also aware of its contents, I think it right at this time
likewise to place a certified copy of it in Mr. Jasper's hand - '
'Not in his own!' asked Rosa, looking up quickly. 'Cannot the copy go to Eddy himself?'
'Why, yes, my dear, if you particularly wish it; but I spoke of Mr. Jasper as being his trustee.'
'I do particularly wish it, if you please,' said Rosa, hurriedly and earnestly; 'I don't like Mr. Jasper to
come between us, in any way.'
'It is natural, I suppose,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'that your young husband should be all in all. Yes.
You observe that I say, I suppose. The fact is, I am a particularly Unnatural man, and I don't know
from my own knowledge.'
Rosa looked at him with some wonder.
'I mean,' he explained, 'that young ways were never my ways. I was the only offspring of parents
far advanced in life, and I half believe I was born advanced in life myself. No personality is
intended towards the name you will so soon change, when I remark that while the general growth
of people seem to have come into existence, buds, I seem to have come into existence a chip. Iwas a chip - and a very dry one - when I first became aware of myself. Respecting the other
certified copy, your wish shall be complied with. Respecting your inheritance, I think you know
all. It is an annuity of two hundred and fifty pounds. The savings upon that annuity, and some
other items to your credit, all duly carried to account, with vouchers, will place you in possession of
a lump-sum of money, rather exceeding Seventeen Hundred Pounds. I am empowered to advance
the cost of your preparations for your marriage out of that fund. All is told.'
'Will you please tell me,' said Rosa, taking the paper with a prettily knitted brow, but not opening it:
'whether I am right in what I am going to say? I can understand what you tell me, so very much
better than what I read in law-writings. My poor papa and Eddy's father made their agreement
together, as very dear and firm and fast friends, in order that we, too, might be very dear and firm
and fast friends after them?'
'Just so.'
'For the lasting good of both of us, and the lasting happiness of both of us?'
'Just so.'
'That we might be to one another even much more than they had been to one another?'
'Just so.'
'It was not bound upon Eddy, and it was not bound upon me, by any forfeit, in case - '
'Don't be agitated, my dear. In the case that it brings tears into your affectionate eyes even to
picture to yourself - in the case of your not marrying one another - no, no forfeiture on either side.
You would then have been my ward until you were of age. No worse would have befallen you.
Bad enough perhaps!'
'And Eddy?'
'He would have come into his partnership derived from his father, and into its arrears to his credit
(if any), on attaining his majority, just as now.'
Rosa, with her perplexed face and knitted brow, bit the corner of her attested copy, as she sat withher head on one side, looking abstractedly on the floor, and smoothing it with her foot.
'In short,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'this betrothal is a wish, a sentiment, a friendly project, tenderly
expressed on both sides. That it was strongly felt, and that there was a lively hope that it would
prosper, there can be no doubt. When you were both children, you began to be accustomed to it,
and it HAS prospered. But circumstances alter cases; and I made this visit to-day, partly, indeed
principally, to discharge myself of the duty of telling you, my dear, that two young people can only
be betrothed in marriage (except as a matter of convenience, and therefore mockery and misery) of
their own free will, their own attachment, and their own assurance (it may or it may not prove a
mistaken one, but we must take our chance of that), that they are suited to each other, and will
make each other happy. Is it to be supposed, for example, that if either of your fathers were living
now, and had any mistrust on that subject, his mind would not be changed by the change of
circumstances involved in the change of your years? Untenable, unreasonable, inconclusive, and
preposterous!'
Mr. Grewgious said all this, as if he were reading it aloud; or, still more, as if he were repeating a
lesson. So expressionless of any approach to spontaneity were his face and manner.
'I have now, my dear,' he added, blurring out 'Will' with his pencil, 'discharged myself of what is
doubtless a formal duty in this case, but still a duty in such a case. Memorandum, "Wishes." My
dear, is there any wish of yours that I can further?'
Rosa shook her head, with an almost plaintive air of hesitation in want of help.
'Is there any instruction that I can take from you with reference to your affairs?'
'I - I should like to settle them with Eddy first, if you please,' said Rosa, plaiting the crease in her
dress.
'Surely, surely,' returned Mr. Grewgious. 'You two should be of one mind in all things. Is the
young gentleman expected shortly?'
'He has gone away only this morning. He will be back at Christmas.'
'Nothing could happen better. You will, on his return at Christmas, arrange all matters of detail
with him; you will then communicate with me; and I will discharge myself (as a mere businessacquaintance) of my business responsibilities towards the accomplished lady in the corner window.
They will accrue at that season.' Blurring pencil once again. 'Memorandum, "Leave." Yes. I
will now, my dear, take my leave.'
'Could I,' said Rosa, rising, as he jerked out of his chair in his ungainly way: 'could I ask you,
most kindly to come to me at Christmas, if I had anything particular to say to you?'
'Why, certainly, certainly,' he rejoined; apparently - if such a word can be used of one who had no
apparent lights or shadows about him - complimented by the question. 'As a particularly Angular
man, I do not fit smoothly into the social circle, and consequently I have no other engagement at
Christmas-time than to partake, on the twenty-fifth, of a boiled turkey and celery sauce with a -
with a particularly Angular clerk I have the good fortune to possess, whose father, being a Norfolk
farmer, sends him up (the turkey up), as a present to me, from the neighbourhood of Norwich. I
should be quite proud of your wishing to see me, my dear. As a professional Receiver of rents, so
very few people DO wish to see me, that the novelty would be bracing.'
For his ready acquiescence, the grateful Rosa put her hands upon his shoulders, stood on tiptoe, and
instantly kissed him.
'Lord bless me!' cried Mr. Grewgious. 'Thank you, my dear! The honour is almost equal to the
pleasure. Miss Twinkleton, madam, I have had a most satisfactory conversation with my ward,
and I will now release you from the incumbrance of my presence.'
'Nay, sir,' rejoined Miss Twinkleton, rising with a gracious condescension: 'say not incumbrance.
Not so, by any means. I cannot permit you to say so.'
'Thank you, madam. I have read in the newspapers,' said Mr. Grewgious, stammering a little, 'that
when a distinguished visitor (not that I am one: far from it) goes to a school (not that this is one:
far from it), he asks for a holiday, or some sort of grace. It being now the afternoon in the -
College - of which you are the eminent head, the young ladies might gain nothing, except in name,
by having the rest of the day allowed them. But if there is any young lady at all under a cloud,
might I solicit - '
'Ah, Mr. Grewgious, Mr. Grewgious!' cried Miss Twinkleton, with a chastely-rallying forefinger.
'O you gentlemen, you gentlemen! Fie for shame, that you are so hard upon us poor maligned
disciplinarians of our sex, for your sakes! But as Miss Ferdinand is at present weighed down byan incubus' - Miss Twinkleton might have said a pen-and-ink-ubus of writing out Monsieur La
Fontaine - 'go to her, Rosa my dear, and tell her the penalty is remitted, in deference to the
intercession of your guardian, Mr. Grewgious.'
Miss Twinkleton here achieved a curtsey, suggestive of marvels happening to her respected legs,
and which she came out of nobly, three yards behind her starting-point.
As he held it incumbent upon him to call on Mr. Jasper before leaving Cloisterham, Mr. Grewgious
went to the gatehouse, and climbed its postern stair. But Mr. Jasper's door being closed, and
presenting on a slip of paper the word 'Cathedral,' the fact of its being service-time was borne into
the mind of Mr. Grewgious. So he descended the stair again, and, crossing the Close, paused at
the great western folding-door of the Cathedral, which stood open on the fine and bright, though
short-lived, afternoon, for the airing of the place.
'Dear me,' said Mr. Grewgious, peeping in, 'it's like looking down the throat of Old Time.'
Old Time heaved a mouldy sigh from tomb and arch and vault; and gloomy shadows began to
deepen in corners; and damps began to rise from green patches of stone; and jewels, cast upon the
pavement of the nave from stained glass by the declining sun, began to perish. Within the
grill-gate of the chancel, up the steps surmounted loomingly by the fast-darkening organ, white
robes could be dimly seen, and one feeble voice, rising and falling in a cracked, monotonous mutter,
could at intervals be faintly heard. In the free outer air, the river, the green pastures, and the
brown arable lands, the teeming hills and dales, were reddened by the sunset: while the distant
little windows in windmills and farm homesteads, shone, patches of bright beaten gold. In the
Cathedral, all became gray, murky, and sepulchral, and the cracked monotonous mutter went on
like a dying voice, until the organ and the choir burst forth, and drowned it in a sea of music.
Then, the sea fell, and the dying voice made another feeble effort, and then the sea rose high, and
beat its life out, and lashed the roof, and surged among the arches, and pierced the heights of the
great tower; and then the sea was dry, and all was still.
Mr. Grewgious had by that time walked to the chancel-steps, where he met the living waters
coming out.
'Nothing is the matter?' Thus Jasper accosted him, rather quickly. 'You have not been sent for?'
'Not at all, not at all. I came down of my own accord. I have been to my pretty ward's, and amnow homeward bound again.'
'You found her thriving?'
'Blooming indeed. Most blooming. I merely came to tell her, seriously, what a betrothal by
deceased parents is.'
'And what is it - according to your judgment?'
Mr. Grewgious noticed the whiteness of the lips that asked the question, and put it down to the
chilling account of the Cathedral.
'I merely came to tell her that it could not be considered binding, against any such reason for its
dissolution as a want of affection, or want of disposition to carry it into effect, on the side of either
party.'
'May I ask, had you any especial reason for telling her that?'
Mr. Grewgious answered somewhat sharply: 'The especial reason of doing my duty, sir. Simply
that.' Then he added: 'Come, Mr. Jasper; I know your affection for your nephew, and that you
are quick to feel on his behalf. I assure you that this implies not the least doubt of, or disrespect to,
your nephew.'
'You could not,' returned Jasper, with a friendly pressure of his arm, as they walked on side by side,
'speak more handsomely.'
Mr. Grewgious pulled off his hat to smooth his head, and, having smoothed it, nodded it
contentedly, and put his hat on again.
'I will wager,' said Jasper, smiling - his lips were still so white that he was conscious of it, and bit
and moistened them while speaking: 'I will wager that she hinted no wish to be released from
Ned.'
'And you will win your wager, if you do,' retorted Mr. Grewgious. 'We should allow some margin
for little maidenly delicacies in a young motherless creature, under such circumstances, I suppose;
it is not in my line; what do you think?''There can be no doubt of it.'
'I am glad you say so. Because,' proceeded Mr. Grewgious, who had all this time very knowingly
felt his way round to action on his remembrance of what she had said of Jasper himself: 'because
she seems to have some little delicate instinct that all preliminary arrangements had best be made
between Mr. Edwin Drood and herself, don't you see? She don't want us, don't you know?'
Jasper touched himself on the breast, and said, somewhat indistinctly: 'You mean me.'
Mr. Grewgious touched himself on the breast, and said: 'I mean us. Therefore, let them have
their little discussions and councils together, when Mr. Edwin Drood comes back here at Christmas;
and then you and I will step in, and put the final touches to the business.'
'So, you settled with her that you would come back at Christmas?' observed Jasper. 'I see! Mr.
Grewgious, as you quite fairly said just now, there is such an exceptional attachment between my
nephew and me, that I am more sensitive for the dear, fortunate, happy, happy fellow than for
myself. But it is only right that the young lady should be considered, as you have pointed out, and
that I should accept my cue from you. I accept it. I understand that at Christmas they will
complete their preparations for May, and that their marriage will be put in final train by themselves,
and that nothing will remain for us but to put ourselves in train also, and have everything ready for
our formal release from our trusts, on Edwin's birthday.'
'That is my understanding,' assented Mr. Grewgious, as they shook hands to part. 'God bless them
both!'
'God save them both!' cried Jasper.
'I said, bless them,' remarked the former, looking back over his shoulder.
'I said, save them,' returned the latter. 'Is there any difference?'CHAPTER X - SMOOTHING THE WAY
IT has been often enough remarked that women have a curious power of divining the characters of
men, which would seem to be innate and instinctive; seeing that it is arrived at through no patient
process of reasoning, that it can give no satisfactory or sufficient account of itself, and that it
pronounces in the most confident manner even against accumulated observation on the part of the
other sex. But it has not been quite so often remarked that this power (fallible, like every other
human attribute) is for the most part absolutely incapable of self-revision; and that when it has
delivered an adverse opinion which by all human lights is subsequently proved to have failed, it is
undistinguishable from prejudice, in respect of its determination not to be corrected. Nay, the very
possibility of contradiction or disproof, however remote, communicates to this feminine judgment
from the first, in nine cases out of ten, the weakness attendant on the testimony of an interested
witness; so personally and strongly does the fair diviner connect herself with her divination.
'Now, don't you think, Ma dear,' said the Minor Canon to his mother one day as she sat at her
knitting in his little book-room, 'that you are rather hard on Mr. Neville?'
'No, I do NOT, Sept,' returned the old lady.
'Let us discuss it, Ma.'
'I have no objection to discuss it, Sept. I trust, my dear, I am always open to discussion.' There
was a vibration in the old lady's cap, as though she internally added: 'and I should like to see the
discussion that would change MY mind!'
'Very good, Ma,' said her conciliatory son. 'There is nothing like being open to discussion.'
'I hope not, my dear,' returned the old lady, evidently shut to it.
'Well! Mr. Neville, on that unfortunate occasion, commits himself under provocation.'
'And under mulled wine,' added the old lady.
'I must admit the wine. Though I believe the two young men were much alike in that regard.''I don't,' said the old lady.
'Why not, Ma?'
'Because I DON'T,' said the old lady. 'Still, I am quite open to discussion.'
'But, my dear Ma, I cannot see how we are to discuss, if you take that line.'
'Blame Mr. Neville for it, Sept, and not me,' said the old lady, with stately severity.
'My dear Ma! why Mr. Neville?'
'Because,' said Mrs. Crisparkle, retiring on first principles, 'he came home intoxicated, and did great
discredit to this house, and showed great disrespect to this family.'
'That is not to be denied, Ma. He was then, and he is now, very sorry for it.'
'But for Mr. Jasper's well-bred consideration in coming up to me, next day, after service, in the
Nave itself, with his gown still on, and expressing his hope that I had not been greatly alarmed or
had my rest violently broken, I believe I might never have heard of that disgraceful transaction,'
said the old lady.
'To be candid, Ma, I think I should have kept it from you if I could: though I had not decidedly
made up my mind. I was following Jasper out, to confer with him on the subject, and to consider
the expediency of his and my jointly hushing the thing up on all accounts, when I found him
speaking to you. Then it was too late.'
'Too late, indeed, Sept. He was still as pale as gentlemanly ashes at what had taken place in his
rooms overnight.'
'If I HAD kept it from you, Ma, you may be sure it would have been for your peace and quiet, and
for the good of the young men, and in my best discharge of my duty according to my lights.'
The old lady immediately walked across the room and kissed him: saying, 'Of course, my dear
Sept, I am sure of that.''However, it became the town-talk,' said Mr. Crisparkle, rubbing his ear, as his mother resumed her
seat, and her knitting, 'and passed out of my power.'
'And I said then, Sept,' returned the old lady, 'that I thought ill of Mr. Neville. And I say now, that
I think ill of Mr. Neville. And I said then, and I say now, that I hope Mr. Neville may come to
good, but I don't believe he will.' Here the cap vibrated again considerably.
'I am sorry to hear you say so, Ma - '
'I am sorry to say so, my dear,' interposed the old lady, knitting on firmly, 'but I can't help it.'
' - For,' pursued the Minor Canon, 'it is undeniable that Mr. Neville is exceedingly industrious and
attentive, and that he improves apace, and that he has - I hope I may say - an attachment to me.'
'There is no merit in the last article, my dear,' said the old lady, quickly; 'and if he says there is, I
think the worse of him for the boast.'
'But, my dear Ma, he never said there was.'
'Perhaps not,' returned the old lady; 'still, I don't see that it greatly signifies.'
There was no impatience in the pleasant look with which Mr. Crisparkle contemplated the pretty
old piece of china as it knitted; but there was, certainly, a humorous sense of its not being a piece of
china to argue with very closely.
'Besides, Sept, ask yourself what he would be without his sister. You know what an influence she
has over him; you know what a capacity she has; you know that whatever he reads with you, he
reads with her. Give her her fair share of your praise, and how much do you leave for him?'
At these words Mr. Crisparkle fell into a little reverie, in which he thought of several things. He
thought of the times he had seen the brother and sister together in deep converse over one of his
own old college books; now, in the rimy mornings, when he made those sharpening pilgrimages to
Cloisterham Weir; now, in the sombre evenings, when he faced the wind at sunset, having climbed
his favourite outlook, a beetling fragment of monastery ruin; and the two studious figures passed
below him along the margin of the river, in which the town fires and lights already shone, makingthe landscape bleaker. He thought how the consciousness had stolen upon him that in teaching
one, he was teaching two; and how he had almost insensibly adapted his explanations to both minds
- that with which his own was daily in contact, and that which he only approached through it. He
thought of the gossip that had reached him from the Nuns' House, to the effect that Helena, whom
he had mistrusted as so proud and fierce, submitted herself to the fairybride (as he called her), and learnt from her what she knew. He thought of the picturesque alliance
between those two, externally so very different. He thought - perhaps most of all - could it be that
these things were yet but so many weeks old, and had become an integral part of his life?
As, whenever the Reverend Septimus fell a-musing, his good mother took it to be an infallible sign
that he 'wanted support,' the blooming old lady made all haste to the dining-room closet, to produce
from it the support embodied in a glass of Constantia and a home-made biscuit. It was a most
wonderful closet, worthy of Cloisterham and of Minor Canon Corner. Above it, a portrait of
Handel in a flowing wig beamed down at the spectator, with a knowing air of being up to the
contents of the closet, and a musical air of intending to combine all its harmonies in one delicious
fugue. No common closet with a vulgar door on hinges, openable all at once, and leaving nothing
to be disclosed by degrees, this rare closet had a lock in mid-air, where two perpendicular slides
met; the one falling down, and the other pushing up. The upper slide, on being pulled down
(leaving the lower a double mystery), revealed deep shelves of pickle-jars, jampots, tin canisters, spice-boxes, and agreeably outlandish vessels of blue and white, the luscious
lodgings of preserved tamarinds and ginger. Every benevolent inhabitant of this retreat had his
name inscribed upon his stomach. The pickles, in a uniform of rich brown double-breasted
buttoned coat, and yellow or sombre drab continuations, announced their portly forms, in printed
capitals, as Walnut, Gherkin, Onion, Cabbage, Cauliflower, Mixed, and other members of that
noble family. The jams, as being of a less masculine temperament, and as wearing curlpapers,
announced themselves in feminine caligraphy, like a soft whisper, to be Raspberry, Gooseberry,
Apricot, Plum, Damson, Apple, and Peach. The scene closing on these charmers, and the lower
slide ascending, oranges were revealed, attended by a mighty japanned sugar-box, to temper their
acerbity if unripe. Home-made biscuits waited at the Court of these Powers, accompanied by a
goodly fragment of plumcake, and various slender ladies' fingers, to be dipped into sweet wine and kissed. Lowest of all, a
compact leaden-vault enshrined the sweet wine and a stock of cordials: whence issued whispers
of Seville Orange, Lemon, Almond, and Caraway-seed. There was a crowning air upon this closet
of closets, of having been for ages hummed through by the Cathedral bell and organ, until those
venerable bees had made sublimated honey of everything in store; and it was always observed that
every dipper among the shelves (deep, as has been noticed, and swallowing up head, shoulders, andelbows) came forth again mellow-faced, and seeming to have undergone a saccharine
transfiguration.
The Reverend Septimus yielded himself up quite as willing a victim to a nauseous medicinal
herb-closet, also presided over by the china shepherdess, as to this glorious cupboard. To what
amazing infusions of gentian, peppermint, gilliflower, sage, parsley, thyme, rue, rosemary, and
dandelion, did his courageous stomach submit itself! In what wonderful wrappers, enclosing
layers of dried leaves, would he swathe his rosy and contented face, if his mother suspected him of
a toothache! What botanical blotches would he cheerfully stick upon his cheek, or forehead, if the
dear old lady convicted him of an imperceptible pimple there! Into this herbaceous penitentiary,
situated on an upper staircase-landing: a low and narrow whitewashed cell, where bunches of
dried leaves hung from rusty hooks in the ceiling, and were spread out upon shelves, in company
with portentous bottles: would the Reverend Septimus submissively be led, like the highly
popular lamb who has so long and unresistingly been led to the slaughter, and there would he,
unlike that lamb, bore nobody but himself. Not even doing that much, so that the old lady were
busy and pleased, he would quietly swallow what was given him, merely taking a corrective dip of
hands and face into the great bowl of dried rose-leaves, and into the other great bowl of dried
lavender, and then would go out, as confident in the sweetening powers of Cloisterham Weir and a
wholesome mind, as Lady Macbeth was hopeless of those of all the seas that roll.
In the present instance the good Minor Canon took his glass of Constantia with an excellent grace,
and, so supported to his mother's satisfaction, applied himself to the remaining duties of the day.
In their orderly and punctual progress they brought round Vesper Service and twilight. The
Cathedral being very cold, he set off for a brisk trot after service; the trot to end in a charge at his
favourite fragment of ruin, which was to be carried by storm, without a pause for breath.
He carried it in a masterly manner, and, not breathed even then, stood looking down upon the river.
The river at Cloisterham is sufficiently near the sea to throw up oftentimes a quantity of seaweed.
An unusual quantity had come in with the last tide, and this, and the confusion of the water, and the
restless dipping and flapping of the noisy gulls, and an angry light out seaward beyond the
brown-sailed barges that were turning black, foreshadowed a stormy night. In his mind he was
contrasting the wild and noisy sea with the quiet harbour of Minor Canon Corner, when Helena and
Neville Landless passed below him. He had had the two together in his thoughts all day, and at
once climbed down to speak to them together. The footing was rough in an uncertain light for any
tread save that of a good climber; but the Minor Canon was as good a climber as most men, and
stood beside them before many good climbers would have been half-way down.'A wild evening, Miss Landless! Do you not find your usual walk with your brother too exposed
and cold for the time of year? Or at all events, when the sun is down, and the weather is driving in
from the sea?'
Helena thought not. It was their favourite walk. It was very retired.
'It is very retired,' assented Mr. Crisparkle, laying hold of his opportunity straightway, and walking
on with them. 'It is a place of all others where one can speak without interruption, as I wish to do.
Mr. Neville, I believe you tell your sister everything that passes between us?'
'Everything, sir.'
'Consequently,' said Mr. Crisparkle, 'your sister is aware that I have repeatedly urged you to make
some kind of apology for that unfortunate occurrence which befell on the night of your arrival
here.' In saying it he looked to her, and not to him; therefore it was she, and not he, who replied:
'Yes.'
'I call it unfortunate, Miss Helena,' resumed Mr. Crisparkle, 'forasmuch as it certainly has
engendered a prejudice against Neville. There is a notion about, that he is a dangerously
passionate fellow, of an uncontrollable and furious temper: he is really avoided as such.'
'I have no doubt he is, poor fellow,' said Helena, with a look of proud compassion at her brother,
expressing a deep sense of his being ungenerously treated. 'I should be quite sure of it, from your
saying so; but what you tell me is confirmed by suppressed hints and references that I meet with
every day.'
'Now,' Mr. Crisparkle again resumed, in a tone of mild though firm persuasion, 'is not this to be
regretted, and ought it not to be amended? These are early days of Neville's in Cloisterham, and I
have no fear of his outliving such a prejudice, and proving himself to have been misunderstood.
But how much wiser to take action at once, than to trust to uncertain time! Besides, apart from its
being politic, it is right. For there can be no question that Neville was wrong.'
'He was provoked,' Helena submitted.'He was the assailant,' Mr. Crisparkle submitted.
They walked on in silence, until Helena raised her eyes to the Minor Canon's face, and said, almost
reproachfully: 'O Mr. Crisparkle, would you have Neville throw himself at young Drood's feet, or
at Mr. Jasper's, who maligns him every day? In your heart you cannot mean it. From your heart
you could not do it, if his case were yours.'
'I have represented to Mr. Crisparkle, Helena,' said Neville, with a glance of deference towards his
tutor, 'that if I could do it from my heart, I would. But I cannot, and I revolt from the pretence.
You forget however, that to put the case to Mr. Crisparkle as his own, is to suppose to have done
what I did.'
'I ask his pardon,' said Helena.
'You see,' remarked Mr. Crisparkle, again laying hold of his opportunity, though with a moderate
and delicate touch, 'you both instinctively acknowledge that Neville did wrong. Then why stop
short, and not otherwise acknowledge it?'
'Is there no difference,' asked Helena, with a little faltering in her manner; 'between submission to a
generous spirit, and submission to a base or trivial one?'
Before the worthy Minor Canon was quite ready with his argument in reference to this nice
distinction, Neville struck in:
'Help me to clear myself with Mr. Crisparkle, Helena. Help me to convince him that I cannot be
the first to make concessions without mockery and falsehood. My nature must be changed before
I can do so, and it is not changed. I am sensible of inexpressible affront, and deliberate
aggravation of inexpressible affront, and I am angry. The plain truth is, I am still as angry when I
recall that night as I was that night.'
'Neville,' hinted the Minor Canon, with a steady countenance, 'you have repeated that former action
of your hands, which I so much dislike.'
'I am sorry for it, sir, but it was involuntary. I confessed that I was still as angry.'
'And I confess,' said Mr. Crisparkle, 'that I hoped for better things.''I am sorry to disappoint you, sir, but it would be far worse to deceive you, and I should deceive
you grossly if I pretended that you had softened me in this respect. The time may come when
your powerful influence will do even that with the difficult pupil whose antecedents you know; but
it has not come yet. Is this so, and in spite of my struggles against myself, Helena?'
She, whose dark eyes were watching the effect of what he said on Mr. Crisparkle's face, replied - to
Mr. Crisparkle, not to him: 'It is so.' After a short pause, she answered the slightest look of
inquiry conceivable, in her brother's eyes, with as slight an affirmative bend of her own head; and
he went on:
'I have never yet had the courage to say to you, sir, what in full openness I ought to have said when
you first talked with me on this subject. It is not easy to say, and I have been withheld by a fear of
its seeming ridiculous, which is very strong upon me down to this last moment, and might, but for
my sister, prevent my being quite open with you even now. - I admire Miss Bud, sir, so very much,
that I cannot bear her being treated with conceit or indifference; and even if I did not feel that I had
an injury against young Drood on my own account, I should feel that I had an injury against him on
hers.'
Mr. Crisparkle, in utter amazement, looked at Helena for corroboration, and met in her expressive
face full corroboration, and a plea for advice.
'The young lady of whom you speak is, as you know, Mr. Neville, shortly to be married,' said Mr.
Crisparkle, gravely; 'therefore your admiration, if it be of that special nature which you seem to
indicate, is outrageously misplaced. Moreover, it is monstrous that you should take upon yourself
to be the young lady's champion against her chosen husband. Besides, you have seen them only
once. The young lady has become your sister's friend; and I wonder that your sister, even on her
behalf, has not checked you in this irrational and culpable fancy.'
'She has tried, sir, but uselessly. Husband or no husband, that fellow is incapable of the feeling
with which I am inspired towards the beautiful young creature whom he treats like a doll. I say he
is as incapable of it, as he is unworthy of her. I say she is sacrificed in being bestowed upon him.
I say that I love her, and despise and hate him!' This with a face so flushed, and a gesture so
violent, that his sister crossed to his side, and caught his arm, remonstrating, 'Neville, Neville!'
Thus recalled to himself, he quickly became sensible of having lost the guard he had set upon hispassionate tendency, and covered his face with his hand, as one repentant and wretched.
Mr. Crisparkle, watching him attentively, and at the same time meditating how to proceed, walked
on for some paces in silence. Then he spoke:
'Mr. Neville, Mr. Neville, I am sorely grieved to see in you more traces of a character as sullen,
angry, and wild, as the night now closing in. They are of too serious an aspect to leave me the
resource of treating the infatuation you have disclosed, as undeserving serious consideration. I
give it very serious consideration, and I speak to you accordingly. This feud between you and
young Drood must not go on. I cannot permit it to go on any longer, knowing what I now know
from you, and you living under my roof. Whatever prejudiced and unauthorised constructions
your blind and envious wrath may put upon his character, it is a frank, good-natured character. I
know I can trust to it for that. Now, pray observe what I am about to say. On reflection, and on
your sister's representation, I am willing to admit that, in making peace with young Drood, you
have a right to be met half-way. I will engage that you shall be, and even that young Drood shall
make the first advance. This condition fulfilled, you will pledge me the honour of a Christian
gentleman that the quarrel is for ever at an end on your side. What may be in your heart when you
give him your hand, can only be known to the Searcher of all hearts; but it will never go well with
you, if there be any treachery there. So far, as to that; next as to what I must again speak of as
your infatuation. I understand it to have been confided to me, and to be known to no other person
save your sister and yourself. Do I understand aright?'
Helena answered in a low voice: 'It is only known to us three who are here together.'
'It is not at all known to the young lady, your friend?'
'On my soul, no!'
'I require you, then, to give me your similar and solemn pledge, Mr. Neville, that it shall remain the
secret it is, and that you will take no other action whatsoever upon it than endeavouring (and that
most earnestly) to erase it from your mind. I will not tell you that it will soon pass; I will not tell
you that it is the fancy of the moment; I will not tell you that such caprices have their rise and fall
among the young and ardent every hour; I will leave you undisturbed in the belief that it has few
parallels or none, that it will abide with you a long time, and that it will be very difficult to conquer.
So much the more weight shall I attach to the pledge I require from you, when it is unreservedly
given.'The young man twice or thrice essayed to speak, but failed.
'Let me leave you with your sister, whom it is time you took home,' said Mr. Crisparkle. 'You will
find me alone in my room by-andby.'
'Pray do not leave us yet,' Helena implored him. 'Another minute.'
'I should not,' said Neville, pressing his hand upon his face, 'have needed so much as another
minute, if you had been less patient with me, Mr. Crisparkle, less considerate of me, and less
unpretendingly good and true. O, if in my childhood I had known such a guide!'
'Follow your guide now, Neville,' murmured Helena, 'and follow him to Heaven!'
There was that in her tone which broke the good Minor Canon's voice, or it would have repudiated
her exaltation of him. As it was, he laid a finger on his lips, and looked towards her brother.
'To say that I give both pledges, Mr. Crisparkle, out of my innermost heart, and to say that there is
no treachery in it, is to say nothing!' Thus Neville, greatly moved. 'I beg your forgiveness for
my miserable lapse into a burst of passion.'
'Not mine, Neville, not mine. You know with whom forgiveness lies, as the highest attribute
conceivable. Miss Helena, you and your brother are twin children. You came into this world
with the same dispositions, and you passed your younger days together surrounded by the same
adverse circumstances. What you have overcome in yourself, can you not overcome in him?
You see the rock that lies in his course. Who but you can keep him clear of it?'
'Who but you, sir?' replied Helena. 'What is my influence, or my weak wisdom, compared with
yours!'
'You have the wisdom of Love,' returned the Minor Canon, 'and it was the highest wisdom ever
known upon this earth, remember. As to mine - but the less said of that commonplace commodity
the better. Good night!'
She took the hand he offered her, and gratefully and almost reverently raised it to her lips.'Tut!' said the Minor Canon softly, 'I am much overpaid!' and turned away.
Retracing his steps towards the Cathedral Close, he tried, as he went along in the dark, to think out
the best means of bringing to pass what he had promised to effect, and what must somehow be
done. 'I shall probably be asked to marry them,' he reflected, 'and I would they were married and
gone! But this presses first.'
He debated principally whether he should write to young Drood, or whether he should speak to
Jasper. The consciousness of being popular with the whole Cathedral establishment inclined him
to the latter course, and the well-timed sight of the lighted gatehouse decided him to take it. 'I will
strike while the iron is hot,' he said, 'and see him now.'
Jasper was lying asleep on a couch before the fire, when, having ascended the postern-stair, and
received no answer to his knock at the door, Mr. Crisparkle gently turned the handle and looked in.
Long afterwards he had cause to remember how Jasper sprang from the couch in a delirious state
between sleeping and waking, and crying out: 'What is the matter? Who did it?'
'It is only I, Jasper. I am sorry to have disturbed you.'
The glare of his eyes settled down into a look of recognition, and he moved a chair or two, to make
a way to the fireside.
'I was dreaming at a great rate, and am glad to be disturbed from an indigestive after-dinner sleep.
Not to mention that you are always welcome.'
'Thank you. I am not confident,' returned Mr. Crisparkle, as he sat himself down in the easy-chair
placed for him, 'that my subject will at first sight be quite as welcome as myself; but I am a minister
of peace, and I pursue my subject in the interests of peace. In a word, Jasper, I want to establish
peace between these two young fellows.'
A very perplexed expression took hold of Mr. Jasper's face; a very perplexing expression too, for
Mr. Crisparkle could make nothing of it.
'How?' was Jasper's inquiry, in a low and slow voice, after a silence.'For the "How" I come to you. I want to ask you to do me the great favour and service of
interposing with your nephew (I have already interposed with Mr. Neville), and getting him to write
you a short note, in his lively way, saying that he is willing to shake hands. I know what a
good-natured fellow he is, and what influence you have with him. And without in the least
defending Mr. Neville, we must all admit that he was bitterly stung.'
Jasper turned that perplexed face towards the fire. Mr. Crisparkle continuing to observe it, found
it even more perplexing than before, inasmuch as it seemed to denote (which could hardly be) some
close internal calculation.
'I know that you are not prepossessed in Mr. Neville's favour,' the Minor Canon was going on, when
Jasper stopped him:
'You have cause to say so. I am not, indeed.'
'Undoubtedly; and I admit his lamentable violence of temper, though I hope he and I will get the
better of it between us. But I have exacted a very solemn promise from him as to his future
demeanour towards your nephew, if you do kindly interpose; and I am sure he will keep it.'
'You are always responsible and trustworthy, Mr. Crisparkle. Do you really feel sure that you can
answer for him so confidently?'
'I do.'
The perplexed and perplexing look vanished.
'Then you relieve my mind of a great dread, and a heavy weight,' said Jasper; 'I will do it.'
Mr. Crisparkle, delighted by the swiftness and completeness of his success, acknowledged it in the
handsomest terms.
'I will do it,' repeated Jasper, 'for the comfort of having your guarantee against my vague and
unfounded fears. You will laugh - but do you keep a Diary?'
'A line for a day; not more.''A line for a day would be quite as much as my uneventful life would need, Heaven knows,' said
Jasper, taking a book from a desk, 'but that my Diary is, in fact, a Diary of Ned's life too. You will
laugh at this entry; you will guess when it was made:
'"Past midnight. - After what I have just now seen, I have a morbid dread upon me of some horrible
consequences resulting to my dear boy, that I cannot reason with or in any way contend against.
All my efforts are vain. The demoniacal passion of this Neville Landless, his strength in his fury,
and his savage rage for the destruction of its object, appal me. So profound is the impression, that
twice since I have gone into my dear boy's room, to assure myself of his sleeping safely, and not
lying dead in his blood."
'Here is another entry next morning:
'"Ned up and away. Light-hearted and unsuspicious as ever. He laughed when I cautioned him,
and said he was as good a man as Neville Landless any day. I told him that might be, but he was
not as bad a man. He continued to make light of it, but I travelled with him as far as I could, and
left him most unwillingly. I am unable to shake off these dark intangible presentiments of evil - if
feelings founded upon staring facts are to be so called."
'Again and again,' said Jasper, in conclusion, twirling the leaves of the book before putting it by, 'I
have relapsed into these moods, as other entries show. But I have now your assurance at my back,
and shall put it in my book, and make it an antidote to my black humours.'
'Such an antidote, I hope,' returned Mr. Crisparkle, 'as will induce you before long to consign the
black humours to the flames. I ought to be the last to find any fault with you this evening, when
you have met my wishes so freely; but I must say, Jasper, that your devotion to your nephew has
made you exaggerative here.'
'You are my witness,' said Jasper, shrugging his shoulders, 'what my state of mind honestly was,
that night, before I sat down to write, and in what words I expressed it. You remember objecting
to a word I used, as being too strong? It was a stronger word than any in my Diary.'
'Well, well. Try the antidote,' rejoined Mr. Crisparkle; 'and may it give you a brighter and better
view of the case! We will discuss it no more now. I have to thank you for myself, thank you
sincerely.'
'You shall find,' said Jasper, as they shook hands, 'that I will not do the thing you wish me to do, by
halves. I will take care that Ned, giving way at all, shall give way thoroughly.'On the third day after this conversation, he called on Mr. Crisparkle with the following letter:
'MY DEAR JACK,
'I am touched by your account of your interview with Mr. Crisparkle, whom I much respect and
esteem. At once I openly say that I forgot myself on that occasion quite as much as Mr. Landless
did, and that I wish that bygone to be a bygone, and all to be right again.
'Look here, dear old boy. Ask Mr. Landless to dinner on Christmas Eve (the better the day the
better the deed), and let there be only we three, and let us shake hands all round there and then, and
say no more about it.
'My dear Jack,
'Ever your most affectionate,
'EDWIN DROOD.
'P.S. Love to Miss Pussy at the next music-lesson.'
'You expect Mr. Neville, then?' said Mr. Crisparkle.
'I count upon his coming,' said Mr. Jasper.
CHAPTER XI - A PICTURE AND A RING
BEHIND the most ancient part of Holborn, London, where certain gabled houses some centuries of
age still stand looking on the public way, as if disconsolately looking for the Old Bourne that has
long run dry, is a little nook composed of two irregular quadrangles, called Staple Inn. It is one of
those nooks, the turning into which out of the clashing street, imparts to the relieved pedestrian the
sensation of having put cotton in his ears, and velvet soles on his boots. It is one of those nooks
where a few smoky sparrows twitter in smoky trees, as though they called to one another, 'Let us
play at country,' and where a few feet of garden-mould and a few yards of gravel enable them to do
that refreshing violence to their tiny understandings. Moreover, it is one of those nooks which are
legal nooks; and it contains a little Hall, with a little lantern in its roof: to what obstructive
purposes devoted, and at whose expense, this history knoweth not.
In the days when Cloisterham took offence at the existence of a railroad afar off, as menacing that
sensitive constitution, the property of us Britons: the odd fortune of which sacred institution it is
to be in exactly equal degrees croaked about, trembled for, and boasted of, whatever happens to
anything, anywhere in the world: in those days no neighbouring architecture of lofty proportionshad arisen to overshadow Staple Inn. The westering sun bestowed bright glances on it, and the
south-west wind blew into it unimpeded.
Neither wind nor sun, however, favoured Staple Inn one December afternoon towards six o'clock,
when it was filled with fog, and candles shed murky and blurred rays through the windows of all its
then-occupied sets of chambers; notably from a set of chambers in a corner house in the little inner
quadrangle, presenting in black and white over its ugly portal the mysterious inscription:
P
J T
1747
In which set of chambers, never having troubled his head about the inscription, unless to bethink
himself at odd times on glancing up at it, that haply it might mean Perhaps John Thomas, or
Perhaps Joe Tyler, sat Mr. Grewgious writing by his fire.
Who could have told, by looking at Mr. Grewgious, whether he had ever known ambition or
disappointment? He had been bred to the Bar, and had laid himself out for chamber practice; to
draw deeds; 'convey the wise it call,' as Pistol says. But Conveyancing and he had made such a
very indifferent marriage of it that they had separated by consent - if there can be said to be
separation where there has never been coming together.
No. Coy Conveyancing would not come to Mr. Grewgious. She was wooed, not won, and they
went their several ways. But an Arbitration being blown towards him by some unaccountable
wind, and he gaining great credit in it as one indefatigable in seeking out right and doing right, a
pretty fat Receivership was next blown into his pocket by a wind more traceable to its source. So,
by chance, he had found his niche. Receiver and Agent now, to two rich estates, and deputing
their legal business, in an amount worth having, to a firm of solicitors on the floor below, he had
snuffed out his ambition (supposing him to have ever lighted it), and had settled down with his
snuffers for the rest of his life under the dry vine and fig-tree of P. J. T., who planted in
seventeen-fortyseven.
Many accounts and account-books, many files of correspondence, and several strong boxes,
garnished Mr. Grewgious's room. They can scarcely be represented as having lumbered it, soconscientious and precise was their orderly arrangement. The apprehension of dying suddenly,
and leaving one fact or one figure with any incompleteness or obscurity attaching to it, would have
stretched Mr. Grewgious stone-dead any day. The largest fidelity to a trust was the life-blood of
the man. There are sorts of life-blood that course more quickly, more gaily, more attractively; but
there is no better sort in circulation.
There was no luxury in his room. Even its comforts were limited to its being dry and warm, and
having a snug though faded fireside. What may be called its private life was confined to the
hearth, and all easy-chair, and an old-fashioned occasional round table that was brought out upon
the rug after business hours, from a corner where it elsewise remained turned up like a shining
mahogany shield. Behind it, when standing thus on the defensive, was a closet, usually containing
something good to drink. An outer room was the clerk's room; Mr. Grewgious's sleeping-room
was across the common stair; and he held some not empty cellarage at the bottom of the common
stair. Three hundred days in the year, at least, he crossed over to the hotel in Furnival's Inn for his
dinner, and after dinner crossed back again, to make the most of these simplicities until it should
become broad business day once more, with P. J. T., date seventeen-forty-seven.
As Mr. Grewgious sat and wrote by his fire that afternoon, so did the clerk of Mr. Grewgious sit
and write by HIS fire. A pale, puffy-faced, dark-haired person of thirty, with big dark eyes that
wholly wanted lustre, and a dissatisfied doughy complexion, that seemed to ask to be sent to the
baker's, this attendant was a mysterious being, possessed of some strange power over Mr.
Grewgious. As though he had been called into existence, like a fabulous Familiar, by a magic
spell which had failed when required to dismiss him, he stuck tight to Mr. Grewgious's stool,
although Mr. Grewgious's comfort and convenience would manifestly have been advanced by
dispossessing him. A gloomy person with tangled locks, and a general air of having been reared
under the shadow of that baleful tree of Java which has given shelter to more lies than the whole
botanical kingdom, Mr. Grewgious, nevertheless, treated him with unaccountable consideration.
'Now, Bazzard,' said Mr. Grewgious, on the entrance of his clerk: looking up from his papers as
he arranged them for the night: 'what is in the wind besides fog?'
'Mr. Drood,' said Bazzard.
'What of him?'
'Has called,' said Bazzard.'You might have shown him in.'
'I am doing it,' said Bazzard.
The visitor came in accordingly.
'Dear me!' said Mr. Grewgious, looking round his pair of office candles. 'I thought you had called
and merely left your name and gone. How do you do, Mr. Edwin? Dear me, you're choking!'
'It's this fog,' returned Edwin; 'and it makes my eyes smart, like Cayenne pepper.'
'Is it really so bad as that? Pray undo your wrappers. It's fortunate I have so good a fire; but Mr.
Bazzard has taken care of me.'
'No I haven't,' said Mr. Bazzard at the door.
'Ah! then it follows that I must have taken care of myself without observing it,' said Mr. Grewgious.
'Pray be seated in my chair. No. I beg! Coming out of such an atmosphere, in MY chair.'
Edwin took the easy-chair in the corner; and the fog he had brought in with him, and the fog he
took off with his greatcoat and neckshawl, was speedily licked up by the eager fire.
'I look,' said Edwin, smiling, 'as if I had come to stop.'
' - By the by,' cried Mr. Grewgious; 'excuse my interrupting you; do stop. The fog may clear in an
hour or two. We can have dinner in from just across Holborn. You had better take your Cayenne
pepper here than outside; pray stop and dine.'
'You are very kind,' said Edwin, glancing about him as though attracted by the notion of a new and
relishing sort of gipsy-party.
'Not at all,' said Mr. Grewgious; 'YOU are very kind to join issue with a bachelor in chambers, and
take pot-luck. And I'll ask,' said Mr. Grewgious, dropping his voice, and speaking with a
twinkling eye, as if inspired with a bright thought: 'I'll ask Bazzard. He mightn't like it else. -Bazzard!'
Bazzard reappeared.
'Dine presently with Mr. Drood and me.'
'If I am ordered to dine, of course I will, sir,' was the gloomy answer.
'Save the man!' cried Mr. Grewgious. 'You're not ordered; you're invited.'
'Thank you, sir,' said Bazzard; 'in that case I don't care if I do.'
'That's arranged. And perhaps you wouldn't mind,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'stepping over to the hotel
in Furnival's, and asking them to send in materials for laying the cloth. For dinner we'll have a
tureen of the hottest and strongest soup available, and we'll have the best made-dish that can be
recommended, and we'll have a joint (such as a haunch of mutton), and we'll have a goose, or a
turkey, or any little stuffed thing of that sort that may happen to be in the bill of fare - in short, we'll
have whatever there is on hand.'
These liberal directions Mr. Grewgious issued with his usual air of reading an inventory, or
repeating a lesson, or doing anything else by rote. Bazzard, after drawing out the round table,
withdrew to execute them.
'I was a little delicate, you see,' said Mr. Grewgious, in a lower tone, after his clerk's departure,
'about employing him in the foraging or commissariat department. Because he mightn't like it.'
'He seems to have his own way, sir,' remarked Edwin.
'His own way?' returned Mr. Grewgious. 'O dear no! Poor fellow, you quite mistake him. If he
had his own way, he wouldn't be here.'
'I wonder where he would be!' Edwin thought. But he only thought it, because Mr. Grewgious
came and stood himself with his back to the other corner of the fire, and his shoulder-blades against
the chimneypiece, and collected his skirts for easy conversation.
'I take it, without having the gift of prophecy, that you have done me the favour of looking in tomention that you are going down yonder - where I can tell you, you are expected - and to offer to
execute any little commission from me to my charming ward, and perhaps to sharpen me up a bit in
any proceedings? Eh, Mr. Edwin?'
'I called, sir, before going down, as an act of attention.'
'Of attention!' said Mr. Grewgious. 'Ah! of course, not of impatience?'
'Impatience, sir?'
Mr. Grewgious had meant to be arch - not that he in the remotest degree expressed that meaning -
and had brought himself into scarcely supportable proximity with the fire, as if to burn the fullest
effect of his archness into himself, as other subtle impressions are burnt into hard metals. But his
archness suddenly flying before the composed face and manner of his visitor, and only the fire
remaining, he started and rubbed himself.
'I have lately been down yonder,' said Mr. Grewgious, rearranging his skirts; 'and that was what I
referred to, when I said I could tell you you are expected.'
'Indeed, sir! Yes; I knew that Pussy was looking out for me.'
'Do you keep a cat down there?' asked Mr. Grewgious.
Edwin coloured a little as he explained: 'I call Rosa Pussy.'
'O, really,' said Mr. Grewgious, smoothing down his head; 'that's very affable.'
Edwin glanced at his face, uncertain whether or no he seriously objected to the appellation. But
Edwin might as well have glanced at the face of a clock.
'A pet name, sir,' he explained again.
'Umps,' said Mr. Grewgious, with a nod. But with such an extraordinary compromise between an
unqualified assent and a qualified dissent, that his visitor was much disconcerted.
'Did PRosa - ' Edwin began by way of recovering himself.'PRosa?' repeated Mr. Grewgious.
'I was going to say Pussy, and changed my mind; - did she tell you anything about the Landlesses?'
'No,' said Mr. Grewgious. 'What is the Landlesses? An estate? A villa? A farm?'
'A brother and sister. The sister is at the Nuns' House, and has become a great friend of P - '
'PRosa's,' Mr. Grewgious struck in, with a fixed face.
'She is a strikingly handsome girl, sir, and I thought she might have been described to you, or
presented to you perhaps?'
'Neither,' said Mr. Grewgious. 'But here is Bazzard.'
Bazzard returned, accompanied by two waiters - an immovable waiter, and a flying waiter; and the
three brought in with them as much fog as gave a new roar to the fire. The flying waiter, who had
brought everything on his shoulders, laid the cloth with amazing rapidity and dexterity; while the
immovable waiter, who had brought nothing, found fault with him. The flying waiter then highly
polished all the glasses he had brought, and the immovable waiter looked through them. The
flying waiter then flew across Holborn for the soup, and flew back again, and then took another
flight for the made-dish, and flew back again, and then took another flight for the joint and poultry,
and flew back again, and between whiles took supplementary flights for a great variety of articles,
as it was discovered from time to time that the immovable waiter had forgotten them all. But let
the flying waiter cleave the air as he might, he was always reproached on his return by the
immovable waiter for bringing fog with him, and being out of breath. At the conclusion of the
repast, by which time the flying waiter was severely blown, the immovable waiter gathered up the
tablecloth under his arm with a grand air, and having sternly (not to say with indignation) looked on
at the flying waiter while he set the clean glasses round, directed a valedictory glance towards Mr.
Grewgious, conveying: 'Let it be clearly understood between us that the reward is mine, and that
Nil is the claim of this slave,' and pushed the flying waiter before him out of the room.
It was like a highly-finished miniature painting representing My Lords of the Circumlocution
Department, Commandership-in-Chief of any sort, Government. It was quite an edifying little
picture to be hung on the line in the National Gallery.As the fog had been the proximate cause of this sumptuous repast, so the fog served for its general
sauce. To hear the out-door clerks sneezing, wheezing, and beating their feet on the gravel was a
zest far surpassing Doctor Kitchener's. To bid, with a shiver, the unfortunate flying waiter shut the
door before he had opened it, was a condiment of a profounder flavour than Harvey. And here let
it be noticed, parenthetically, that the leg of this young man, in its application to the door, evinced
the finest sense of touch: always preceding himself and tray (with something of an angling air
about it), by some seconds: and always lingering after he and the tray had disappeared, like
Macbeth's leg when accompanying him off the stage with reluctance to the assassination of
Duncan.
The host had gone below to the cellar, and had brought up bottles of ruby, straw-coloured, and
golden drinks, which had ripened long ago in lands where no fogs are, and had since lain
slumbering in the shade. Sparkling and tingling after so long a nap, they pushed at their corks to
help the corkscrew (like prisoners helping rioters to force their gates), and danced out gaily. If P. J.
T. in seventeen-forty-seven, or in any other year of his period, drank such wines - then, for a
certainty, P. J. T. was Pretty Jolly Too.
Externally, Mr. Grewgious showed no signs of being mellowed by these glowing vintages.
Instead of his drinking them, they might have been poured over him in his high-dried snuff form,
and run to waste, for any lights and shades they caused to flicker over his face. Neither was his
manner influenced. But, in his wooden way, he had observant eyes for Edwin; and when at the
end of dinner, he motioned Edwin back to his own easy-chair in the fireside corner, and Edwin sank
luxuriously into it after very brief remonstrance, Mr. Grewgious, as he turned his seat round
towards the fire too, and smoothed his head and face, might have been seen looking at his visitor
between his smoothing fingers.
'Bazzard!' said Mr. Grewgious, suddenly turning to him.
'I follow you, sir,' returned Bazzard; who had done his work of consuming meat and drink in a
workmanlike manner, though mostly in speechlessness.
'I drink to you, Bazzard; Mr. Edwin, success to Mr. Bazzard!'
'Success to Mr. Bazzard!' echoed Edwin, with a totally unfounded appearance of enthusiasm, and
with the unspoken addition: 'What in, I wonder!''And May!' pursued Mr. Grewgious - 'I am not at liberty to be definite - May! - my conversational
powers are so very limited that I know I shall not come well out of this - May! - it ought to be put
imaginatively, but I have no imagination - May! - the thorn of anxiety is as nearly the mark as I am
likely to get - May it come out at last!'
Mr. Bazzard, with a frowning smile at the fire, put a hand into his tangled locks, as if the thorn of
anxiety were there; then into his waistcoat, as if it were there; then into his pockets, as if it were
there. In all these movements he was closely followed by the eyes of Edwin, as if that young
gentleman expected to see the thorn in action. It was not produced, however, and Mr. Bazzard
merely said: 'I follow you, sir, and I thank you.'
'I am going,' said Mr. Grewgious, jingling his glass on the table with one hand, and bending aside
under cover of the other, to whisper to Edwin, 'to drink to my ward. But I put Bazzard first. He
mightn't like it else.'
This was said with a mysterious wink; or what would have been a wink, if, in Mr. Grewgious's
hands, it could have been quick enough. So Edwin winked responsively, without the least idea
what he meant by doing so.
'And now,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'I devote a bumper to the fair and fascinating Miss Rosa. Bazzard,
the fair and fascinating Miss Rosa!'
'I follow you, sir,' said Bazzard, 'and I pledge you!'
'And so do I!' said Edwin.
'Lord bless me,' cried Mr. Grewgious, breaking the blank silence which of course ensued: though
why these pauses SHOULD come upon us when we have performed any small social rite, not
directly inducive of self-examination or mental despondency, who can tell? 'I am a particularly
Angular man, and yet I fancy (if I may use the word, not having a morsel of fancy), that I could
draw a picture of a true lover's state of mind, to-night.'
'Let us follow you, sir,' said Bazzard, 'and have the picture.'
'Mr. Edwin will correct it where it's wrong,' resumed Mr. Grewgious, 'and will throw in a fewtouches from the life. I dare say it is wrong in many particulars, and wants many touches from the
life, for I was born a Chip, and have neither soft sympathies nor soft experiences. Well! I hazard
the guess that the true lover's mind is completely permeated by the beloved object of his affections.
I hazard the guess that her dear name is precious to him, cannot be heard or repeated without
emotion, and is preserved sacred. If he has any distinguishing appellation of fondness for her, it is
reserved for her, and is not for common ears. A name that it would be a privilege to call her by,
being alone with her own bright self, it would be a liberty, a coldness, an insensibility, almost a
breach of good faith, to flaunt elsewhere.'
It was wonderful to see Mr. Grewgious sitting bolt upright, with his hands on his knees,
continuously chopping this discourse out of himself: much as a charity boy with a very good
memory might get his catechism said: and evincing no correspondent emotion whatever, unless in
a certain occasional little tingling perceptible at the end of his nose.
'My picture,' Mr. Grewgious proceeded, 'goes on to represent (under correction from you, Mr.
Edwin), the true lover as ever impatient to be in the presence or vicinity of the beloved object of his
affections; as caring very little for his case in any other society; and as constantly seeking that. If
I was to say seeking that, as a bird seeks its nest, I should make an ass of myself, because that
would trench upon what I understand to be poetry; and I am so far from trenching upon poetry at
any time, that I never, to my knowledge, got within ten thousand miles of it. And I am besides
totally unacquainted with the habits of birds, except the birds of Staple Inn, who seek their nests on
ledges, and in gutterpipes and chimneypots, not constructed for them by the beneficent hand of Nature. I beg,
therefore, to be understood as foregoing the bird's-nest. But my picture does represent the true
lover as having no existence separable from that of the beloved object of his affections, and as
living at once a doubled life and a halved life. And if I do not clearly express what I mean by that,
it is either for the reason that having no conversational powers, I cannot express what I mean, or
that having no meaning, I do not mean what I fail to express. Which, to the best of my belief, is
not the case.'
Edwin had turned red and turned white, as certain points of this picture came into the light. He
now sat looking at the fire, and bit his lip.
'The speculations of an Angular man,' resumed Mr. Grewgious, still sitting and speaking exactly as
before, 'are probably erroneous on so globular a topic. But I figure to myself (subject, as before,
to Mr. Edwin's correction), that there can be no coolness, no lassitude, no doubt, no indifference, nohalf fire and half smoke state of mind, in a real lover. Pray am I at all near the mark in my
picture?'
As abrupt in his conclusion as in his commencement and progress, he jerked this inquiry at Edwin,
and stopped when one might have supposed him in the middle of his oration.
'I should say, sir,' stammered Edwin, 'as you refer the question to me - '
'Yes,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'I refer it to you, as an authority.'
'I should say, then, sir,' Edwin went on, embarrassed, 'that the picture you have drawn is generally
correct; but I submit that perhaps you may be rather hard upon the unlucky lover.'
'Likely so,' assented Mr. Grewgious, 'likely so. I am a hard man in the grain.'
'He may not show,' said Edwin, 'all he feels; or he may not - '
There he stopped so long, to find the rest of his sentence, that Mr. Grewgious rendered his difficulty
a thousand times the greater by unexpectedly striking in with:
'No to be sure; he MAY not!'
After that, they all sat silent; the silence of Mr. Bazzard being occasioned by slumber.
'His responsibility is very great, though,' said Mr. Grewgious at length, with his eyes on the fire.
Edwin nodded assent, with HIS eyes on the fire.
'And let him be sure that he trifles with no one,' said Mr. Grewgious; 'neither with himself, nor with
any other.'
Edwin bit his lip again, and still sat looking at the fire.
'He must not make a plaything of a treasure. Woe betide him if he does! Let him take that well
to heart,' said Mr. Grewgious.Though he said these things in short sentences, much as the supposititious charity boy just now
referred to might have repeated a verse or two from the Book of Proverbs, there was something
dreamy (for so literal a man) in the way in which he now shook his right forefinger at the live coals
in the grate, and again fell silent.
But not for long. As he sat upright and stiff in his chair, he suddenly rapped his knees, like the
carved image of some queer Joss or other coming out of its reverie, and said: 'We must finish this
bottle, Mr. Edwin. Let me help you. I'll help Bazzard too, though he IS asleep. He mightn't
like it else.'
He helped them both, and helped himself, and drained his glass, and stood it bottom upward on the
table, as though he had just caught a bluebottle in it.
'And now, Mr. Edwin,' he proceeded, wiping his mouth and hands upon his handkerchief: 'to a
little piece of business. You received from me, the other day, a certified copy of Miss Rosa's
father's will. You knew its contents before, but you received it from me as a matter of business.
I should have sent it to Mr. Jasper, but for Miss Rosa's wishing it to come straight to you, in
preference. You received it?'
'Quite safely, sir.'
'You should have acknowledged its receipt,' said Mr. Grewgious; 'business being business all the
world over. However, you did not.'
'I meant to have acknowledged it when I first came in this evening, sir.'
'Not a business-like acknowledgment,' returned Mr. Grewgious; 'however, let that pass. Now, in
that document you have observed a few words of kindly allusion to its being left to me to discharge
a little trust, confided to me in conversation, at such time as I in my discretion may think best.'
'Yes, sir.'
'Mr. Edwin, it came into my mind just now, when I was looking at the fire, that I could, in my
discretion, acquit myself of that trust at no better time than the present. Favour me with your
attention, half a minute.'He took a bunch of keys from his pocket, singled out by the candlelight the key he wanted, and then, with a candle in his hand, went to a bureau or escritoire,
unlocked it, touched the spring of a little secret drawer, and took from it an ordinary ring-case made
for a single ring. With this in his hand, he returned to his chair. As he held it up for the young
man to see, his hand trembled.
'Mr. Edwin, this rose of diamonds and rubies delicately set in gold, was a ring belonging to Miss
Rosa's mother. It was removed from her dead hand, in my presence, with such distracted grief as I
hope it may never be my lot to contemplate again. Hard man as I am, I am not hard enough for
that. See how bright these stones shine!' opening the case. 'And yet the eyes that were so much
brighter, and that so often looked upon them with a light and a proud heart, have been ashes among
ashes, and dust among dust, some years! If I had any imagination (which it is needless to say I
have not), I might imagine that the lasting beauty of these stones was almost cruel.'
He closed the case again as he spoke.
'This ring was given to the young lady who was drowned so early in her beautiful and happy career,
by her husband, when they first plighted their faith to one another. It was he who removed it from
her unconscious hand, and it was he who, when his death drew very near, placed it in mine. The
trust in which I received it, was, that, you and Miss Rosa growing to manhood and womanhood,
and your betrothal prospering and coming to maturity, I should give it to you to place upon her
finger. Failing those desired results, it was to remain in my possession.'
Some trouble was in the young man's face, and some indecision was in the action of his hand, as Mr.
Grewgious, looking steadfastly at him, gave him the ring.
'Your placing it on her finger,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'will be the solemn seal upon your strict fidelity
to the living and the dead. You are going to her, to make the last irrevocable preparations for your
marriage. Take it with you.'
The young man took the little case, and placed it in his breast.
'If anything should be amiss, if anything should be even slightly wrong, between you; if you should
have any secret consciousness that you are committing yourself to this step for no higher reason
than because you have long been accustomed to look forward to it; then,' said Mr. Grewgious, 'I
charge you once more, by the living and by the dead, to bring that ring back to me!'Here Bazzard awoke himself by his own snoring; and, as is usual in such cases, sat apoplectically
staring at vacancy, as defying vacancy to accuse him of having been asleep.
'Bazzard!' said Mr. Grewgious, harder than ever.
'I follow you, sir,' said Bazzard, 'and I have been following you.'
'In discharge of a trust, I have handed Mr. Edwin Drood a ring of diamonds and rubies. You see?'
Edwin reproduced the little case, and opened it; and Bazzard looked into it.
'I follow you both, sir,' returned Bazzard, 'and I witness the transaction.'
Evidently anxious to get away and be alone, Edwin Drood now resumed his outer clothing,
muttering something about time and appointments. The fog was reported no clearer (by the flying
waiter, who alighted from a speculative flight in the coffee interest), but he went out into it; and
Bazzard, after his manner, 'followed' him.
Mr. Grewgious, left alone, walked softly and slowly to and fro, for an hour and more. He was
restless to-night, and seemed dispirited.
'I hope I have done right,' he said. 'The appeal to him seemed necessary. It was hard to lose the
ring, and yet it must have gone from me very soon.'
He closed the empty little drawer with a sigh, and shut and locked the escritoire, and came back to
the solitary fireside.
'Her ring,' he went on. 'Will it come back to me? My mind hangs about her ring very uneasily
to-night. But that is explainable. I have had it so long, and I have prized it so much! I wonder
- '
He was in a wondering mood as well as a restless; for, though he checked himself at that point, and
took another walk, he resumed his wondering when he sat down again.
'I wonder (for the ten-thousandth time, and what a weak fool I, for what can it signify now!)whether he confided the charge of their orphan child to me, because he knew - Good God, how like
her mother she has become!'
'I wonder whether he ever so much as suspected that some one doted on her, at a hopeless,
speechless distance, when he struck in and won her. I wonder whether it ever crept into his mind
who that unfortunate some one was!'
'I wonder whether I shall sleep to-night! At all events, I will shut out the world with the
bedclothes, and try.'
Mr. Grewgious crossed the staircase to his raw and foggy bedroom, and was soon ready for bed.
Dimly catching sight of his face in the misty looking-glass, he held his candle to it for a moment.
'A likely some one, YOU, to come into anybody's thoughts in such an aspect!' he exclaimed.
'There! there! there! Get to bed, poor man, and cease to jabber!'