I’m	pretty	much	screwed.
That’s	my	considered	opinion.
Screwed.
Six	days	in	to	what	should	be	a	greatest	two	months	of	my	life,	and
it’s	turned in to a	nightmare.
I	don’t	even know	who’ll	read this. I	guess	someone	will	find it
eventually. Maybe	a	hundred years	from	now.
For	the	record… I	didn’t	die	on Sol	6. Certainly the	rest	of	the	crew
thought	I	did, and I	can’t	blame	th
glad you survived.
I guess I should explain how Mars missions work, for any layman
who may be reading this. We got to earth orbit the normal way, through
an ordinary ship to Hermes. All the Ares missions use Hermes to get to
and from Mars. It’s really big and cost a lot so NASA only built one.
Once we got to Hermes, four additional unmanned missions brought
us fuel and supplies while we prepared for our trip. Once everything was
a go, we set out for Mars. But not very fast. Gone are the days of heavy
chemical fuel burns and trans-Mars injection orbits.
Hermes is powered by ion engines. They throw Argon out the back of
the ship really fast to get a tiny amount of acceleration. The thing is, it
doesn't take much reactant mass, so a little Argon (and a nuclear reactor
to power things) let us accelerate constantly the whole way there. You'd
be amazed at how fast you can get going with a tiny acceleration over a
long time.
I could regale you with tales of how we had great fun on the trip, but I
won’t. We did have fun, but I don’t feel like reliving it right now. Suffice
it to say we got to Mars 124 days later without strangling each other.
From there, we took the MDV (Mars Descent Vehicle) to the surface.
The MDV is basically a big can with some light thrusters and parachutes
attached. Its sole purpose is to get six humans from Mars orbit to the
surface without killing any of them.
And now we come to the real trick of Mars exploration: Having all
our shit there in advance.
A total of 14 unmanned missions deposited everything we would need
for surface operations. They tried their best to land all the supply vessels
in the same general area, and did a reasonably good job. Supplies aren’t
nearly so fragile as humans and can hit the ground really hard. But they
tended to bounce around a lot.
Naturally, they didn’t send us to Mars until they’d confirmed all the
supplies had made it to the surface and their containers weren’t breached.
Start to finish, including supply missions, a Mars mission takes about 3
years. In fact, there were Ares 3 supplies en route to Mars while the Ares
2 crew were on their way home.
The most important piece of the advance supplies, of course, was the
MAV. The “Mars Ascent Vehicle.” That was how we would get back to
Hermes after surface operations were complete. The MAV was softlanded
(as opposed to the balloon bounce-fest the other supplies had). Of
course, it was in constant communication with Houston, and if there were
any problems with it, we would pass by Mars and go back to Earth
without ever landing.
The MAV is pretty cool. Turns out, through a neat set of chemical
reactions with the Martian atmosphere, for every kilogram of hydrogen
you bring to Mars, you can make 13 kilograms of fuel. It’s a slow
process, though. It takes 24 months to fill the tank. That’s why they sent
it long before we got here.
You can imagine how disappointed I was when I discovered the MAV
was gone.
It was a ridiculous sequence of events that led to me almost dying.
Then an even more ridiculous sequence that led to me surviving.
The mission is designed to handle sandstorm gusts up to 150 km/hr.
So Houston got understandably nervous when we got whacked with 175
km/hr winds. We all got in our suits and huddled in the middle of the
Hab, just in case it lost pressure. But the Hab wasn’t the problem.
The MAV is a spaceship. It has a lot of delicate parts. It can put up
with storms to a certain extent but it can’t just get sandblasted forever.
After an hour and a half of sustained wind, NASA gave the order to abort.
Nobody wanted to stop a month-long mission after only six days but if
the MAV took any more punishment we’d all get stranded down here.
We had to go out in the storm to get from the Hab to the MAV. That
was going to be risky, but what choice did we have?
Everyone made it but me.
Our main communications dish, which relayed signals from the Hab
to Hermes, acted like a parachute, getting torn from its foundation and
carried with the torrent. Along the way, it crashed through the reception
antenna array. Then one of those long thin antennae slammed in to me
end first. It	tore	through my suit	like	a	bullet	through butter	and I	felt	the
worst	pain of	my life	as	it	ripped open my side. I	vaguely remember
suddenly having the	wind knocked out	of	me	(pulled out	of	me, really)
and my ears	popping painfully as	the	pressure	of	my suit	escaped.
The	last	thing I	remember	was	seeing Johanssen hopelessly reaching
out	toward me.
I	awoke	to	the	oxygen	alarm	in	my	suit.	A	steady,	obnoxious	beeping
that	eventually	roused	me	from	a	deep	and	profound	desire	to	just	.... die.
The	storm	had abated;	I	was	face	down, almost	totally buried in sand.
As	I	groggily came	to, I	wondered why I	wasn’t	more	dead.
The	antenna	had enough force	to punch through the	suit	and my side,
but	then it	got	stopped by my pelvis. So there	was	only one	hole	in the
suit	(and a	hole	in me, of	course).
I	had been knocked back quite	a	ways	and rolled down a	steep hill.
Somehow	I	landed face	down, which forced the	antenna	to a	strongly
oblique	angle	that	put	a	lot	of	torque	on the	hole	in the	suit. It	made	a
weak seal.
Then, the	copious	blood from	my wound trickled down toward the
hole. As	the	blood reached the	site	of	the	breach, the	water	in it	quickly
evaporated from	the	airflow	and low	pressure, leaving only a	gunky
residue	behind. More	blood came	in behind it	and was	also reduced to
gunk. Eventually, the	blood sealed the	gaps	around the	hole	and reduced
the	leak to something the	suit	could counteract.
The	suit	did its	job admirably. Seeing the	drop in pressure, it
constantly flooded itself	with air	from	my nitrogen tank to equalize. Once
the	leak became	manageable, it	only had to trickle	new	air	in slowly the
relieve	the	air	lost.
After	a	while, the	CO2 (carbon dioxide)	absorbers	in the	suit	were
expended. That’s	really the	limiting factor	to life	support. Not	the
amount	of	oxygen you bring with you, but	the	amount	of	CO2 you can
remove. In the	Hab, we	had the	Oxygenator, a	large	piece	of	equipment
that	could break CO2 apart	and give	the	oxygen back. But	the	spacesuits
had to be portable, so they used a simple chemical absorption process
with expendable filters. I’d been asleep long enough that my filters were
useless.
The suit saw this problem and moved in to an emergency mode the
engineers call “bloodletting”. Having no way to separate out the CO2, the
suit deliberately vented air to the Martian atmosphere, then back-filled
with nitrogen. Between the breach and the bloodletting, it quickly ran out
of nitrogen. All it had left was my oxygen tank.
So it did the only thing it could to keep me alive. It started backfilling
with pure oxygen. I now risked dying from oxygen toxicity, as the
excessively high amount of oxygen threatened to burn up my nervous
system, lungs, and eyes. An ironic death for someone with a leaky space
suit: too much oxygen.
Every step of the way would have had beeping alarms, alerts, and
warnings. But it was the high-oxygen warning that woke me.
The sheer volume of training for a space mission is astounding. I
spent a week back on Earth practicing emergency space suit drills. I knew
what to do.
Carefully reaching to the side of my helmet, I got the breach kit. It’s
nothing more than a funnel with a valve at the small end, and an
unbelievably sticky resin on the wide end. The idea is you have the valve
open and stick the wide end over a hole. The air can escape through the
valve, so it doesn’t interfere with the resin making a good seal. Then you
close the valve and you’ve sealed the breach.
The tricky part was getting the antenna out of the way. I pulled it out
as fast as I could, wincing as the sudden pressure drop dizzied me and
made the wound in my side scream in agony.
I got the breach kit over the hole and sealed it. It held. The suit backfilled
the missing air with yet more oxygen. Checking my arm readouts, I
saw the suit was now at 85% oxygen. For reference, Earth’s atmosphere
is about 21%. I’d be ok, so long as I didn’t spend too much time like that.
I stumbled up the hill back toward the Hab. As I crested the rise, I saw
something that made me very happy and something that made me very
sad: The Hab was in-tact (yay!) and the MAV was gone (boo!).
Right that moment I knew I was screwed. But I didn’t want to just die
out on the surface. I limped back to the Hab and fumbled my way in to an
airlock. As soon as it equalized, I threw off my helmet.
Entering the Hab, I doffed the suit and got my first good look at the
injury. It would need stitches. Fortunately, all of us had been trained in
basic medical procedures, and the Hab had excellent medical supplies. A
quick shot of local anesthetic, irrigate the wound, 9 stitches and I was
done. I’d be taking antibiotics for a couple of weeks, but other than that
I’d be fine.
I knew it was hopeless, but I tried firing up the communication array.
No signal, of course. The primary satellite dish had broken off,
remember? And it took the reception antennae with it. The Hab had
secondary and tertiary communication systems, but they were both just
for talking to the MAV, which would use its much more powerful
systems to relay to Hermes. Thing is, that only works if the MAV is still
around.
I had no way to talk to Hermes. In time, I could locate the dish out on
the surface, but it would take weeks for me to rig up any repairs, and that
would be too late. In an abort, Hermes would leave orbit within 24 hours.
The orbital dynamics made the trip safer and shorter the earlier you left,
so why wait for no reason just to make the trip take longer?
Checking out my suit, I saw the antenna had plowed through my biomonitor
computer. When on an EVA, all the crew’s suits are networked
so we can see each others status. The rest of the crew would have seen the
pressure in my suit drop to nearly 0, followed immediately by my biosigns
going flat. Add to that I was sent tumbling down a hill with a spear
through me in the middle of a sandstorm… yeah. They thought I was
dead. How could they not?
They may have even had a brief discussion about recovering my body,
but regulations were clear. In the event a crewman died on Mars, he
stayed on Mars. Leaving his body behind reduced weight for the MAV on
the trip back. That meant more disposable fuel and a larger margin of
error for the return thrust. No point in giving that up for sentimentality.
So that’s	the	situation. I’m	stranded on Mars. I	have	no way to
communicate	with Hermes	or	Earth. Everyone	thinks	I’m	dead. I’m	in a
Hab designed to last	31 days.
If	the	Oxygenator	breaks	down, I’ll	suffocate. If	the	Water	Reclaimer
breaks	down, I’ll	die	of	thirst. If	the	Hab breaches, I’ll	just	kind of
explode. If	none	of	those	things	happen, I’ll	eventually run out	of	food
and starve	to death.
So	yeah.	I’m	.....	
Chapter 2
LOG ENTRY: SOL 7
Ok, I’ve had a good night’s sleep, and things don’t seem as hopeless
as they did yesterday.
Today I took stock of supplies, and did a quick EVA to check up on
the external equipment. Here’s my situation:
The surface mission was supposed to be 31 days. For redundancy, the
supply probes had enough food to last the whole crew 56 days. That way
if one or two probes had problems, we'd still have enough food to
complete the mission.
We were six days in when all hell broke loose, so that leaves enough
food to feed six people for 50 days. I’m just one guy, so it’ll last me 300
days. And that’s if I don’t ration it. So I’ve got a fair bit of time.
The Hab stood up to the storm without any problems. Outside, things
aren’t so rosy. I can’t find the satellite dish; it probably got blown
kilometers away.
The MAV is gone, of course. My crewmates took it up to Hermes.
Though the bottom half (the landing stage) is still there. No reason to
take that back up when weight is the enemy. It includes the landing gear,
the fuel plant, and anything else NASA figured it wouldn’t need for the
trip back up to orbit.
The MDV is on its side and there’s a breach in the hull. Looks like the
storm ripped the cowling off the reserve chute (which we didn’t have to
use on landing). Once the chute was exposed it dragged the MDV all over
the place, smashing it against every rock in the area. Not that the MDV
would be much use to me. Its thrusters can’t even lift its own weight. But
it might have been valuable for parts. Might still be.
Both rovers are half-buried in sand, but they’re in good shape
otherwise. Their pressure seals are in-tact. Makes sense. Operating
procedure if a storm hits is to stop motion and wait for the storm to pass.
They’re made to stand up to punishment. I’ll be able to dig them out with
a day or so of work.
I’ve lost communication with the weather stations, placed a kilometer
away from the Hab in 4 directions. They might be in perfect working
order for all I know. The Hab’s communications are so weak right now it
probably can’t even reach a kilometer.
The solar cell array was covered it in sand, rendering it useless (hint:
solar cells need sunlight to make electricity). But once I swept them off,
they returned to full efficiency. Whatever I end up doing, I’ll have plenty
of power for it. 200 square meters of solar cells, with hydrogen fuel cells
to store plenty of reserve. All I need to do is sweep them off every few
days.
Things indoors are great, thanks to the Hab’s sturdy design.
I ran a full diagnostic on the Oxygenator. Twice. It’s perfect. If
anything goes wrong with it, there is a short-term spare I can use. But it’s
solely for emergency use while repairing the main one. The spare doesn’t
actually pull CO2 apart and recapture the oxygen. It just absorbs the CO2
the same way the spacesuits do. It’s intended to last 5 days before it
saturates the filters, which means 30 days for me (just one person
breathing, instead of six). So there’s some insurance there.
The Water Reclaimer is working fine, too. The bad news is there’s no
backup. If it stops working, I’ll be drinking reserve water while I rig up a
primitive distillery to boil piss. Also, I’ll lose half a liter of water per day
to breathing until the humidity in the Hab reaches its maximum and water
starts condensing on every surface. Then I’ll be licking the walls. Yay.
Anyway, for now, no problems with the Water Reclaimer.
So yeah. Food, water, shelter all taken care of. I’m going to start
rationing food right now. Meals are pretty minimal already, but I think I
can eat a 3/4 portion per meal and still be all right. That should turn my
300 days of food in to 400. Foraging around the medical area, I found the
main bottle of vitamins. There’s enough multivitamins there to last years.
So I won’t have any nutritional problems (though I’ll still starve to death
when I’m out of food, no matter how many vitamins I take).
The medical area has morphine for emergencies. And there’s enough
there for a lethal dose. I’m not going to slowly starve to death, I’ll tell
you that. If I get to that point, I’ll take an easier way out.
Everyone on the mission had two specialties. I’m a botanist and
mechanical engineer. Basically, I was the mission’s fix-it man who
played with plants. The mechanical engineering might save my life if
something breaks.
I’ve been thinking about how to survive this. It’s not completely
hopeless. There’ll be humans back on Mars in about four years when Ares
4 arrives (assuming they didn’t cancel the program in the wake of my
“death”).
Ares 4 will be landing at the Schiaparelli Crater, which is about
3,200km away from my location here in the Acidalia Planitia. No way for
me to get there on my own. But if I could communicate, I might be able
to get a rescue. Not sure how they’d manage that with the resources on
hand, but NASA has a lot of smart people.
So that’s my mission now. Find a way to communicate with Earth. If I
can’t manage that, find a way to communicate with Hermes when it
returns in 4 years with the Ares 4 crew.
Of course, I don’t have any plan for surviving 4 years on 1 year of
food. But one thing at a time here. For now, I’m well fed and have a
purpose: “Fix the damn radio”.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 10
Well, I’ve done three EVAs and haven’t found any hint of the
communication dish.
I dug out one of the rovers and had a good drive around, but after days
of wandering I think it’s time to give up. The storm probably blew the
dish far away and then erased any drag-marks or scuffs that might have
led to a trail. Probably buried it, too.
I spent most of today out at what’s left of the communication array.
It’s really a sorry sight. I may as well yell toward Earth for all the good
that damned thing will do me.
I could throw together a rudimentary dish out of metal I find around
the base, but this isn’t some walkie-talkie I’m working with here.
Communicating from Mars to Earth is a pretty big deal, and requires
extremely specialized equipment. I won’t be able to whip something up
with tinfoil and gum.
I need to ration my EVAs as well as food. The CO2 filters are not
cleanable. Once they’re saturated, they’re done. The mission accounted
for a 4-hour EVA per crewmember per day. Fortunately, CO2 filters are
light and small so NASA had the luxury of sending more than we needed.
All told, I have about 1500 hours worth of CO2 filters. After that, any
EVAs I do will have to be managed with bloodletting the air.
1500 hours may sound like a lot, but I’m faced with spending at least
4 years here if I’m going to have any hope of rescue, with a minimum of
several hours per week dedicated to sweeping off the solar array.
Anyway. No needless EVAs.
In other news, I’m starting to come up with an idea for food. My
botany background may come in useful after all.
Why bring a botanist to Mars? After all, it’s famous for not having
anything growing here. Well, the idea was to figure out how well things
grow in Martian gravity, and see what, if anything, we can do with
Martian soil. The short answer is: quite a lot… almost. Martian soil has
the basic building blocks needed for plant growth, but there’s a lot of
stuff going on in Earth soil that Mars soil doesn’t have, even when it’s
placed in an Earth-atmosphere and given plenty of water. Bacterial
activity, certain nutrients provided by animal life, etc. None of that is
happening on Mars. One of my tasks for the mission was to see how
plants grow here, in various combinations of Earth or Mars soil and
atmosphere.
That’s why I have a small amount of Earth soil and a bunch of plant
seeds with me.
I can’t get too excited, however. It’s about the amount of soil you’d
put in a window planter-box, and the only seeds I have are a few species
of grass and ferns. They’re the most rugged and easily grown plants on
earth, so NASA picked them as the test subjects.
So I have two problems: not enough dirt, and nothing edible to plant
in it.
But I’m a botanist, damn it. I should be able to find a way to make
this happen. If I don’t, I’ll be a really hungry botanist in about a year.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 11
I wonder how the Cubs are doing.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 14
I got my undergrad degree at the University of Chicago. Half the
people who studied botany were hippies who thought they could return to
some natural world system. Somehow feeding 7 billion people through
pure gathering. They spent most of their time working out better ways to
grow pot. I didn’t like them. I’ve always been in it for the science, not for
any New World Order bullshit.
When they made compost heaps and tried to conserve every little
ounce of living matter, I laughed at them. “Look at the silly hippies!” I
would scoff. “Look at their pathetic attempts to simulate a complex
global ecosystem in their back yard.”
Of course now I’m doing exactly that. I’m saving every scrap of
biomatter I can find. Every time I finish a meal, the leftovers go to the
compost bucket. As for other biological material…
The Hab has sophisticated toilets. Shit is usually vaccum-dried, then
accumulated in sealed bags to be discarded on the surface.
Not any more!
In fact, I even did an EVA to recover the previous bags of shit from
before the crew left. Being completely desiccated, this particular shit
didn’t have bacteria in it anymore, but it still had complex proteins and
would serve as useful manure. Adding it to water and active bacteria
would quickly get it inundated, replacing any population killed by the
Toilet Of Doom.
I found a big container and filled it with a bit of water, then added the
dried shit. Since then, I’ve added my own shit to it as well. The worse it
smells, the more successful things are going. That’s the bacteria at work!
Once I get some Martian soil in here, I can mix in the shit and spread
it out. Then I can sprinkle the Earth soil on top. You might not think that
would be an important step, but it is. There are dozens of species of
bacteria living in Earth soil, and they're critical to plant growth. They'll
spread out and breed like... well, like a bacterial infection..
Within a week, the Martian soil will be ready for plants to germinate
in. But I won’t plant yet. I’ll spread it out over a doubled area. It’ll
“infect” the new Martian soil. After another week, I’ll double it again.
And so on. Of course, all the while, I’ll be adding all new manure to the
effort.
My asshole is doing as much to keep me alive as my brain.
This isn’t a new concept I just came up with. People have speculated
on how to make crop soil out of Martian dirt for decades. I’ll just be
putting it to the test for the first time.
I searched through the food supplies and found all sorts of things that
I can plant. Peas, for instance. Plenty of beans, too. I also found several
potatoes. If *any* of them can still germinate after their ordeal, that’ll be
great. With a nearly infinite supply of vitamins, all I need are calories of
any kind to survive.
The total floor-space of the Hab is about 92 square meters. I plan to
dedicate all of it to this endeavor. I don’t mind walking on dirt. It’ll be a
lot of work, but I’m going to need to cover the entire floor to a depth of
10 cm. That means I’ll have to transport 9.2 cubic meters of Martian soil
in to the Hab. I can get maybe 1/10th of a cubic meter in through the
airlock at a time, and it’ll be backbreaking work to collect it. But in the
end, if everything goes to plan, I’ll have 92 square meters of croppable
soil.
Hell yeah I’m a botanist! Fear my botany powers!
LOG ENTRY: SOL 15
Ugh! This is backbreaking work!
I spent 12 hours today on EVAs to bring dirt in to the Hab. I only
managed to cover a small corner of the base, maybe 5 square meters. At
this rate it’ll take me weeks to get all the soil in. But hey, time is one
thing I’ve got.
The first few EVAs were pretty inefficient; me filling small
containers and bringing them in through the airlock. Then I got wise and
just put one big container in the airlock itself and filled that with small
containers till it was full. That sped things up a lot because the airlock
takes about 10 minutes to get through.
I ache all over. And the shovels I have are made for taking samples,
not heavy digging. My back is killing me. I foraged in the medical
supplies and found some Vicodin. I took it about 10 minutes ago. Should
be kicking in soon.
Anyway, it’s nice to see progress. Time to start getting the bacteria to
work on these minerals. After lunch. No 3/4 ration today. I’ve earned a
full meal.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 16
One complication I hadn’t though of: Water.
Turns out being on the surface of Mars for a few million years
eliminates all the water in the soil. My master’s degree in botany makes
me pretty sure plants need wet dirt to grow in. Not to mention the
bacteria that has to live in it first.
Fortunately, I have water. But not as much as I want. To be viable,
soil needs 40 liters of water per cubic meter. My overall plan calls for 9.2
cubic meters of soil. So I’ll eventually need 368 liters of water to feed it.
The Hab has an excellent Water Reclaimer. Best technology available
on Earth. So NASA figured “why send a lot of water up there? Just send
enough for an emergency.” Humans need 3 liters of water per day to be
comfortable. They gave us 50 liters each. There are 300 liters total in the
Hab.
Looks like I won’t be able to cover the whole surface of the Hab with
fertile soil. I’m willing to dedicate all but an emergency 50 liters to the
cause. That means I can feed 62.5 square meters at a depth of 10cm.
About 2/3 of the Hab’s floor. It’ll have to do. Anyway, I’ve only got a
paltry 5 square meters covered at the moment.
After that, things got disgusting. I spent three hours spreading shit on
Martian sand. I didn’t have to do it with my hands, at least.
I spread the sand out in a corner of the Hab, about 10cm thick. I
wadded up a few blankets and uniforms from my departed crewmates to
serve as one edge of a planter box (with the curved walls of the Hab being
the rest of the perimeter). Then I sacrificed 20 liters of precious water to
the dirt gods.
5 square meters was about right for the amount of manure I had
handy. I dumped my big container o’ shit on to the soil and nearly puked
from the smell.
That smell’s going to stick around for a while, too. It’s not like I can
open a window. Still, you get used to it. I mixed this soil and shit together
with a shovel, and spread it out evenly again. Then I sprinkled the Earth
soil on top. Get to work, bacteria. I’m counting on you.
In other news, today is Thanksgiving. My family will be gathering in
Chicago for the usual feast at my parent's house. My guess is it won't be
much fun, what with me having died 11 days ago. Hell, they probably just
got done gathering for my funeral.
I wonder if they'll ever find out what really happened.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 22
Wow. Things really came along.
I got all the sand in and ready to go. 2/3 of the base is now dirt. And
today I executed my first dirt-doubling. It's been a week, and the former
Martian soil was rich and lovely. Two more doublings and I will have
covered the whole field.
All that work was great for my morale. It gave me something to do.
But after things settled down a bit, and I had dinner while listening to
Johanssen’s Beatles music collection, I got depressed again.
Doing the math, this won’t keep me from starving.
My best bet for making calories is potatoes. They grow prolifically
and have a reasonable caloric content (770 calories per kg). I’m pretty
sure the ones I have will germinate. Problem is I can’t grow enough of
them. In 62 square meters, I could grow maybe 150kg of potatoes in 400
days (the time I have before running out of food). That’s a grand total of
115,500 calories, a sustainable average of 288 calories per day. With my
height and weight, if I’m willing to starve a little, I need 1500 calories
per day.
Not even close.
So I can’t just live off the land for ever. But I can extend my life. The
potatoes will last me 76 days.
Potatoes grow continually, so in those 76 days, I can grow another
22,000 calories of potatoes, which will tide me over for another 15 days.
After that, it’s kind of pointless to continue the trend. All told it buys me
about 90 days.
So now I’ll start starving to death on Sol 490 instead of Sol 400. It’s
progress, but any hope of survival rests on me surviving until Sol 1412,
when Ares 4 will land.
There’s about a thousand days of food I don’t have. And I don’t have
a plan for how to get it.
Shit.
Chapter 3
LOG ENTRY: SOL 25
Remember those old math questions you had in Algebra class? Where
water is entering a container at a certain rate and leaving at a different
rate and you need to figure out when it’ll be empty? Well, that concept is
critical to the “Mark Watney doesn’t die” project I’m working on.
I need to create calories. And I need enough to last four years. I figure
if I don’t get rescued by Ares 4, I’m dead anyway. So that’s my target:
four years.
I have plenty of multivitamins; over double what I need. And there’s
five times the minimum protein in each food pack, so careful rationing of
portions takes care of my protein needs for at least four years. My general
nutrition is taken care of. I just need calories.
I need 1500 calories every day. I have 400 days of food to start off
with. So how many calories do I need to generate per day along the entire
time period to stay alive for 1400 days total (the time till Ares 4 arrives)?
I’ll spare you the math. The answer is a cool 1000. I need to create
1000 calories per day with my farming efforts to survive until Ares 4 gets
here. Actually, a little more than that, because it’s sol 25 right now and I
haven’t actually planted anything yet.
With my 62 square meters of farmland, I’ll be able to create about
288 calories per day. I need to bring that up to 1000. I need four times my
current plan’s production to survive.
I need more surface area for farming, and I need water to hydrate the
soil. So let’s take the problems one at a time.
How much farmland can I really make?
There are 92 square meters in the Hab. Let’s say I could make use of
all of it.
Also, there are five unused bunks. Let’s say I put soil in on them, too.
They’re 2 square meters each, giving me 10 more square meters. So
we’re up to 102.
The Hab has three lab tables, each about 2 square meters. I want to
keep one for my own use, leaving two for the cause. That’s another four
square meters, bringing the total to 106.
I have two Martian rovers. They have pressure seals, allowing the
occupants to drive in ease, without spacesuits, as they spent long periods
traversing the surface. They’re too cramped to plant crops in, and I want
to be able to drive them around anyway. But both rovers have an
emergency pop-tent.
There are a lot of problems with using pop-tents as farmland, but they
have 10 square meters of floor space each. Presuming I can overcome the
problems, they net me another 20 square meters, bringing my farmland
up to 126.
126 square meters of farmable land. That’s something to work with.
Not nearly enough water to moisten the soil, but like I said, one thing at a
time.
The next thing to consider is how efficient I can be in growing
potatoes. I based my crop yield estimates on the potato industry back on
Earth. But potato farmers aren’t in a desperate race for survival like I am.
Can I get a better yield?
For starters, I can give attention to each individual plant. I can trim
them and keep them healthy and not interfering with each other. Also, as
their flowering bodies breach the surface, I can replant them deeper, then
plant younger plants above them. For normal potato farmers, it’s not
worth doing because they’re working with literally millions of potato
plants.
Also, this sort of farming annihilates the soil. Any farmer doing it
would turn their land into a dust bowl within 12 years. It’s not
sustainable. But who gives a shit? I just need to survive four years.
I estimate I can get 50% higher yield by using these tactics. And with
the 126 square meter farmland (just over double the 62 square meters I
have) it works out to be over 900 calories per day.
That’s real progress. I’d still be in danger of starvation, but it gets me
in the range of survival. I might be able to make it by nearly starving but
not quite dying. I could reduce my caloric use by minimizing manual
labor. I could set the temperature of the Hab higher than normal, meaning
my body expends less energy keeping its temperature. I could cut off an
arm and eat it, gaining me valuable calories and reducing my overall
caloric need.
No, not really.
So let’s say I could clear up that much farmland. Seems reasonable.
Where do I get the water? To go from 62 to 126 square meters of
farmland at 10cm deep, I’ll need 6.4 more cubic meters of soil (more
shoveling, whee!) and that’ll need over 250 liters of water.
The 50L I have is for me to drink if the Water Reclaimer breaks. So
I’m 250L short of my 250L goal.
Bleh. I’m going to bed.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 26
It was a back-breaking yet productive day.
I was sick of thinking, so instead of trying to figure out where I’ll get
250L of water, I did some manual labor. I need to get a whole assload
more soil in to the Hab, even if it is dry and useless right now.
I got a cubic meter in before getting exhausted.
Then, a minor dust-storm dropped by for an hour and covered the
solar collectors with crap. So I had to suit up *again* and do *another*
EVA. I was in a pissy mood the whole time. Sweeping off a huge field of
solar cells is boring and physically demanding. But once the job was
done, I came back to my Little Hab on the Prairie.
It was about time for another dirt-doubling, so I figured I may as well
get it over with. It took an hour. One more doubling and the usable soil
will all be good to go.
Also, I figured it was time to start up a seed crop. I’d doubled the soil
enough that I could afford to leave a little corner of it alone. I had 12
potatoes to work with.
I am one lucky son-of-a-bitch they aren’t freeze-dried or mulched.
Why did NASA send 12 whole potatoes, refrigerated but not frozen? And
why send them along with us as in-pressure cargo rather than in a crate
with the rest of the Hab supplies? Because Thanksgiving was going to
happen while we were doing surface operations, and NASA’s shrinks
thought it would be good to make a meal together. Not just to eat it, but
to actually prepare it. There’s probably some logic to that, but who cares?
I cut each potato in to 4 pieces, making sure each piece had at least 2
eyes. The eyes are where they sprout from. I let them sit for a few hours
to harden a bit, then planted them, well spaced apart, in the corner. God
speed, little taters. My life depends on you.
Normally, it takes 90 days to yield full sized potatoes. But I can’t wait
that long. I’ll need to cut up all the potatoes from this crop to seed the
rest of the field.
By setting the Hab temperature to a balmy 25.5C, the plants will grow
quicker. Also, the internal lights will provide plenty of “sunlight” and I’ll
make sure they get lots of water (once I figure out where to get water).
There will be no foul weather, or any parasites to hassle them, or any
weeds to compete with for soil or nutrients. With all this going for them,
they should yield healthy, sproutable tubers within 40 days.
I figured that was enough being Farmer Mark for one day.
A full meal for dinner. I’d earned it. Plus, I’d burned a ton of calories
and I wanted them back.
I rifled through Commander Lewis’s stuff until I found her personal
data-stick. Everyone got to bring whatever digital entertainment they
wanted, and I was tired of listening to Johanssen’s Beatles Albums for
now. Time to see what Lewis had.
Crappy TV shows. That’s what she had. Countless entire runs of TV
shows from forever ago.
Well. Beggars can’t be choosers. “Three’s Company” it is.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 29
Over the last few days, I got all the dirt in that I’d need. I prepped the
tables and bunks for holding the weight of soil, and even put the dirt in
place. There’s still no water to make it viable, but I have some ideas.
Really bad ideas, but they’re ideas.
Today’s big accomplishment was setting up the pop-tents.
The problem with the rovers’ pop-tents is they weren’t designed for
frequent use.
The idea was you’d throw out a pop-tent, get in, and wait for rescue.
The airlock is nothing more than valves and two doors. Equalize the
airlock with your side of it, get in. equalize with the other side, get out.
This means you lose a lot of air each use. And I’ll need to get in there at
least once a day. The total volume of each pop tent is pretty low, so I
can’t afford to lose air from it.
I spent *hours* trying to figure out how to attach a pop-tent airlock to
a Hab airlock. I have three airlocks in the Hab. I’d be willing to dedicate
two to pop-tents. That would have been awesome.
The frustrating part is pop-tent airlocks *can* attach to other
airlocks! You might have injured people in there, or not enough space
suits. You need to be able to get people out without exposing them to the
Martian atmosphere.
But the pop-tents were designed for your crewmates to come rescue
you in a *rover*. The airlocks on the Hab are much larger and completely
different than the airlocks on the rovers. When you think about it, there’s
really no reason to attach a pop-tent to the Hab.
Unless you’re stranded on Mars and everyone thinks you’re dead and
you’re in a desperate fight against time and the elements to stay alive.
But, you know, other than that edge case there’s no reason.
So I finally decided I’d just take the hit. I’ll be losing some air every
time I enter or exit a pop-tent. The good news is each pop-tent has an air
feed valve on the outside. Remember, these are emergency shelters. The
occupants might need air, and you can provide it from a rover by hooking
up an air line. It’s nothing more than a tube that equalizes the rover’s air
with the pop-tent’s.
The Hab and the rovers use the same valve and tubing standards, so I
was able to attach the pop tents directly to the Hab. That'll automatically
replenish the	air	I	lose	with my entries	and exits	(what	we	NASA	folk call
ingress	and egress).
NASA	was	not	....	around	with	these	emergency	tents.	The moment	I	
pushed	the	panic	button	in	the	rover,	there	was	an	ear-popping whoosh	as	
the	pop-tent	fired	out,	attached	to	the	rover	airlock.	It	took about	two	
seconds.
I	closed the	airlock from	the	rover	side	and ended up with a	nice,
isolated pop-tent. Setting up the	equalizer	hose	was	trivial	(for	once	I’m
using equipment	the	way it	was	designed to be	used). Then, after	a	few
trips	through the	airlock (with the	air-loss	automatically equalized by the
Hab)	I	got	the	dirt	in.
I	repeated the	process	for	the	other	tent. Everything went	really
easily.
Sigh… water.
In high school, I	played a	lot	of	Dungeons	and Dragons. (You may not
have	guessed this	Botanist	/	Mechanical	Engineer	was	a	bit	of	a	nerd in
high school, but	indeed I	was). In the	game	I	played a	Cleric. One	of	the
magic	spells	I	could cast	was	“Create	Water”. I	always	thought	it	was	a
really stupid spell, and it	never	came	up. Boy what	I	wouldn’t	give	to be
able	to do that	in real	life	right	now.
Anyway. That’s	a	problem	for	tomorrow.
For	tonight, I	have	to get	back to “Three’s	Company.”	I	stopped last
night	in the	middle	of	the	episode	where	Mr. Roper	saw	something and
took it	out	of	context.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	30
I	have	an idiotically dangerous	plan for	getting the	water	I	need. And
boy do I	mean *dangerous*. But	I	don’t	have	much choice. I’m	out	of
ideas	and I’m	due	for	another	dirt-doubling in a	few	days. When I	do the
final	doubling, I’ll	be	doubling on to all	that	new	soil	I’ve	brought	in. If	I
don’t	wet	it	first, it’ll	just	die.
There	isn’t	a	lot	of	water	here	on Mars. There’s	ice	at	the	poles, but
they’re too far away. If I want water I’ll have to make it from scratch.
Fortunately, I know the recipe: Take hydrogen. Add oxygen. Burn.
Let’s take them one at a time. I’ll start with oxygen.
I have a fair bit of O2 reserves, but not enough to make 250 liters of
water. Two high-pressure tanks at one end of the Hab are my entire
supply (plus the air in the Hab of course). They each contain 25 liters of
liquid O2. The Hab would only use them in an emergency; it has the
Oxygenator to balance the atmosphere. The reason the O2 tanks are here
is to feed the spacesuits and rovers.
Anyway, the reserve oxygen would only be enough to make 100L of
water (50L of O2 makes 100L of molecules that only have one O each).
That would mean no EVAs for me, and no emergency reserves. And it
would make less than half the water I need. Out of the question.
But oxygen’s easier to find on Mars than you might think. The
atmosphere is 98% CO2. And I happen to have a machine whose sole
purpose is liberating oxygen from CO2. Yay Oxygenator!
One problem: The atmosphere is very thin. About 1/90th the pressure
on Earth. So it’s hard to collect. Getting air from outside to inside is
nearly impossible. The whole purpose of the Hab is to keep that sort of
thing from happening. The tiny amount of Martian atmosphere that enters
when I use an airlock is laughable.
That’s where the MAV fuel plant comes in.
My crewmates took the MAV away weeks ago. But the bottom half of
it stayed behind. NASA is not in the habit of putting unnecessary shit in
to orbit. It left the landing gear, ingress ramp, and fuel plant behind.
Remember how the MAV made its own fuel with help from the Martian
atmosphere? Step one of that is to collect CO2 and store it in a high
pressure vessel. Once I get that hooked up to the Hab’s power, it’ll give
me half a liter of liquid CO2 per hour, indefinitely. After 5 days it’ll have
made 125L of CO2, which will make 125L of O2 after I feed it through
the Oxygenator.
That’s enough to make 250L of water. So I have a plan for oxygen.
The hydrogen will be a little trickier.
I considered raiding the hydrogen fuel-cells, but I need those batteries
to maintain power at night. If I don’t have that, It’ll get too cold. I could
bundle up, but the cold would kill my crops. And each fuel cell only has a
small amount of H2 anyway. It’s just not worth sacrificing so much
usefulness for so little gain. The one thing I have going for me is that
energy is not a problem. I don’t want to give that up.
So I’ll have to go a different route.
I often talk about the MAV. But now I want to talk about the MDV.
During the most terrifying 23 minutes of my life, four of my
crewmates and I tried not to shit ourselves while Martinez piloted the
MDV down to the surface. It was kind of like being in a tumble-dryer.
First, we descended from Hermes, and decelerated our orbital velocity
so we could start falling properly. Everything was smooth until we hit the
atmosphere. If you think turbulence is rough in a jetliner going 720kph,
just imagine what it’s like at 28,000kph.
Several staged sets of chutes deployed automatically to slow our
descent, then Martinez manually piloted us to the ground, using the
thrusters to slow descent and control our lateral motion. He’d trained for
this for years, and he did his job extraordinarily well. He exceeded all
plausible expectations of landings, putting us just nine meters from the
target. The guy just plain owned that landing.
Thanks, Martinez! You may have saved my life!
Not because of the perfect landing, but because he left so much fuel
behind. Hundreds of liters of unused Hydrazine. Each molecule of
Hydrazine has four hydrogen atoms in it. So each liter of Hydrazine has
enough hydrogen for *two* liters of water.
I did a little EVA today to check. The MDV has 292L of juice left in
the tanks. Enough to make a almost 600L of water! Way more than I
need!
There’s just one catch: Liberating hydrogen from Hydrazine is…
well… it's how rockets work. It’s really, really hot. And dangerous. If I
do it in an oxygen atmosphere, the heat and newly liberated hydrogen will
explode. There’ll be a lot of H2O at the end, but I’ll be too dead to
appreciate it.
At its root, Hydrazine is pretty simple. The Germans used it as far
back as World War II for rocket-assisted fighter fuel (and occasionally
blew themselves up with it).
All you have to do is run it over a catalyst (which I can extract from
the MDV engine) and it will turn in to nitrogen and hydrogen. I’ll spare
you the chemistry, but the end result is that 5 molecules of Hydrazine
becomes 5 molecules of harmless N2 and 10 molecules of lovely H2.
During this process, it goes through an intermediate step of being
ammonia. Chemistry, being the sloppy bitch it is, ensures there’ll be
some ammonia that doesn’t react with the Hydrazine, so it’ll just stay
ammonia. You like the smell of ammonia? Well it’ll be prevalent in my
increasingly hellish existence.
The chemistry is on my side. The question now is how do I actually
make this reaction happen slowly and how do I collect the hydrogen? The
answer is: I don’t know.
I suppose I’ll think of something. Or die.
Anyway, much more important: I simply can’t abide the replacement
of Chrissie with Cindy. “Three’s Company” may never be the same after
this fiasco. Time will tell.
Chapter 4
LOG ENTRY: SOL 32
So I ran in to a bunch of problems with my water plan.
My idea is to make 600L of water (limited by the hydrogen I can get
from the Hydrazine). That means I’ll need 300L of liquid O2.
I can create the O2 easily enough. It takes 20 hours for the MAV fuel
plant to fill its 10L tank with CO2. The Oxygenator can turn it in to O2,
then the Atmospheric Regulator will see the O2 content in the Hab is
high, and pull it out of the air, storing it in the main O2 tanks. They’d fill
up, so I’d have to transfer O2 over to the rovers’ tanks and even space
suit tanks as necessary.
But I can’t create it very quickly. At 1/2L of CO2 per hour, it will
take 25 days to make the oxygen I need. That’s longer than I’d like.
Also, there’s the problem of storing the hydrogen. The air tanks of the
Hab, the rovers, and all the space suits add up to exactly 374L of storage.
To hold all the materials for water, I would need a whopping 900L of
storage.
I considered using one of the rovers as a “tank”. It would certainly be
big enough, but it just isn’t designed to hold in that much pressure. It’s
made to hold (you guessed it) one atmosphere. I need vessels that can
hold 50 times that much. I’m sure a rover would burst.
The best way to store the ingredients of water is to make them be
water. So what’s what I’ll have to do.
The concept is simple, but the execution will be incredibly dangerous.
Every 20 hours, I’ll have 10L of CO2 thanks to the MAV fuel plant.
I’ll vent it in to the Hab via the highly scientific method of detaching the
tank from the MAV landing struts, bringing it in to the Hab, then opening
the valve until it’s empty.
The Oxygenator will turn it in to oxygen in its own time.
Then, I’ll release Hydrazine, VERY SLOWLY, over the iridium
catalyst, to turn it	in to N2 and H2. I’ll	direct	the	hydrogen to a	small	area
and burn it.
As	you can see, this	plan provides	many opportunities	for	me	to die	in
a	fiery explosion.
Firstly, Hydrazine	is	some	serious	death. If	I	make	any mistakes,
there’ll	be	nothing left	but	the	“Mark Watney Memorial	Crater”	where
the	Hab once	stood.
Presuming	I	don’t	....	up	with	the	Hydrazine,	there’s	still	the	matter of	
burning	hydrogen.	I’m	going	to	be	setting	a	fire.	In	the	Hab.	On purpose.
If	you asked every engineer	at	NASA	what	the	worst	scenario for	the
Hab was, they’d all	answer	“fire.”	If	you asked them	what	the	result
would be, they’d answer	“death by fire.”
But	if	I	can pull	it	off, I’ll	be	making water	continuously, with no
need to store	hydrogen or	oxygen. It’ll	be	mixed in to the	atmosphere	as
humidity, but	the	Water	Reclaimer	will	pull	it	out.
I	don’t	even have	to perfectly match the	Hydrazine	end of	it	with the
fuel	plant	CO2 part. There’s	plenty of	oxygen in the	Hab, and plenty more
in reserve. I	just	need to make	sure	not	to make	so much water	I	run
myself	out	of	O2.
I	hooked up the	MAV	fuel	plant	to the	Hab’s	power	supply.
Fortunately they both use	the	same	voltage. It’s	chugging away,
collecting CO2 for	me.
Half-ration for	dinner. All	I	accomplished today was	thinking up a
plan that’ll	kill	me, and that	doesn’t	take	much energy.
I’m	going to finish off	the	last	of	“Three’s	Company”	tonight.
Frankly, I	like	Mr. Furley more	than the	Ropers.
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	33
This	may be	my last	entry.
I’ve	known since	Sol	6 there	was	a	good chance	I’d die	here. But	I
figured it	would be	when I	ran out	of	food. I	didn’t	think it	would be	this
early.
I’m	about	the	fire	up the	Hydrazine.
Our	mission	was	designed	knowing	that	anything	might	need
maintenance,	so	I	have	plenty	of	tools.	Even	in	a	space-suit,	I	was	able	to
pry	the	access	panels	off	the	MDV	and	get	at	the	six	Hydrazine	tanks.	I
set	them	in	the	shadow	of	a	rover	to	keep	them	from	heating	up	too	much.
There’s	more	shade	and	a	cooler	temperature	near	the	Hab,	but	....	that. If	
they’re	going	to	blow	up,	they	can	blow	up	a	rover,	not	my	house.
Then I	pried out	the	reaction chamber. It	took some	work and I
cracked the	damn thing in half, but	I	got	it	out. Lucky for	me	I	don’t	need
a	proper	fuel	reaction. In fact, I	really, super-duper	don’t	want	a	proper
fuel	reaction.
I	brought	all	the	Hydrazine	and reaction chamber	in. I	briefly
considered only having one	tank in at	a	time	to reduce	risk. But	some
back-of-the-napkin math told me	even one	tank was	enough to blow	the
whole	Hab up, so why not	bring them	all	in?
The	tanks	have	manual	vent	valves. I’m	not	100%	sure	what	they’re
for. Certainly we	were	never	expected to use	them. I	think they’re	there	to
release	pressure	during the	many quality checks	done	during construction
and before	fueling. Whatever	the	reason, I	have	valves	to work with. All
it	takes	is	a	wrench.
I	liberated a	spare	water	hose	from	the	Water	Reclaimer. With some
thread torn out	of	a	uniform	(Sorry, Johanssen), I	attached it	to the	valve
output. Hydrazine	is	a	liquid, so all	I	have	to do is	lead it	to the	reaction
chamber	(more	of	a	“reaction bowl”	now).
Meanwhile, the	MAV	fuel	plant	is	still	working. I’ve	already brought
in one	tank of	CO2, vented it, and returned it	for	refilling.
So there	are	no more	excuses. It’s	time	to start	making water.
If	you find the	charred remains	of	the	Hab, it	means	I	did something
wrong. I’m	copying this	log over	to both rovers	so it’s	more	likely it’ll
survive.
Here	goes	nothin’
LOG ENTRY: SOL 33 (2)
Well, I didn’t die.
First thing I did was put on the inner lining of my EVA suit. Not the
bulky suit itself, just the inner clothing I wear under it, including the
gloves and booties. Then I got an oxygen mask from the medical supplies
and some lab goggles from Vogel's chem kit. Almost all of my body was
now protected and I would be breathing canned air.
Why? Because Hydrazine is very toxic. If I breathe too much of it I'll
get major lung problems. If I get it on my skin, I'll have chemical burns
for the rest of my life. I wasn't taking any chances.
I turned the valve until a trickle of Hydrazine came out. I let one drop
fall in to the iridium bowl.
It un-dramatically sizzled and disappeared.
But hey, that’s what I wanted. I just freed up hydrogen and nitrogen.
Yay!
One thing I have in abundance here is bags. They’re not much
different than kitchen trash bags, though I’m sure they cost $50,000
because NASA.
In addition to being our commander, Lewis was also the geologist.
She was going to collect rock and soil samples from all over the
operational area (10 km radius). Weight limits restricted how much she
could actually bring back, so she was going to collect first, then sort out
the most interesting 50kg to take home. The bags are to store and tag the
samples. Some are smaller than a Ziploc, while others are as big as a
Hefty lawn and leaf bag.
Also, I have duct tape. Ordinary duct tape, like you buy at a hardware
store. Turns out even NASA can’t improve on duct tape.
I cut up a few Hefty sized bags and taped them together to make a sort
of tent. Really it was more of a super-sized bag. I was able to cover the
whole table where my Hydrazine mad scientist set-up was. I put a few
knickknacks on the table to keep the plastic out of the iridium bowl.
Thankfully, the bags are clear, so I can still see what’s going on.
Next, I sacrificed a spacesuit to the cause. I needed an air hose. I have
a	surplus	of	space	suits, after	all. A	total	of	seven;	one	for	each
crewmember	and one	spare. So I	don’t	mind murdering one	of	them.
I	cut	a	hole	in the	top of	the	plastic	and duct	taped the	hose	in place.
Nice	seal, I	think.
With some	more	string from	Johannsen’s	clothing, I	hung the	other
end of	the	hose	from	the	top of	the	Hab's	dome	by two angled threads	(to
keep them	well	clear	of	the	hose	opening). Now	I	had a	little	chimney.
The	hose	was	about	1cm	wide. Hopefully a	good aperture.
The	hydrogen will	be	hot	after	the	reaction, and it'll	want	to go up. So
I’ll	let	it	go up the	chimney, then burn it	as	it	comes	out.
Then I	had to invent	fire.
NASA	put	a	lot	of	effort	in to making sure	nothing here	can burn.
Everything is	made	of	metal	or	flame	retardant	plastic	and the	uniforms
are	synthetic. I	needed something that	could hold a	flame, some	kind of
pilot	light. I	don't	have	the	skills	to keep enough H2 flowing to feed a
flame	without	killing myself. Too narrow	a	margin there.
After	a	search of	everyone’s	personal	items	(hey, if	they wanted
privacy, they shouldn’t	have	abandoned me	on Mars	with their	stuff)	I
found my answer.
Martinez	is	a	devout	catholic. I	knew	that. What	I	didn’t	know	was	he
brought	along a	small	wooden cross. I’m	sure	NASA	gave	him	shit	about
it, but	I	also know	Martinez	is	one	stubborn son-of-a-bitch.
I	chipped his	sacred religious	item	into long splinters	using a	pair	of
pliers	and a	screwdriver. I	figure	if	there’s	a	God, He	won’t	mind,
considering the	situation I’m	in.
Ruining the	only religious	icon I	have	leaves	me	vulnerable	to Mars
Vampires. I’ll	have	to risk it.
There	were	plenty of	wires	and batteries	around to make	a	spark. But
you can’t	just	ignite	wood with a	small	electric	spark. So I	collected
ribbons	of	bark from	local	palm	trees, then got	a	couple	of	sticks	and
rubbed them	together	to create	enough friction to…
No	not	really.	I	vented	pure	oxygen	at	the	stick	and	gave	it	a	
spark. .... lit	up	like	a	match.
With my mini-torch in hand, I	started a	slow	Hydrazine	flow. It
sizzled on the iridium and disappeared. Soon I had short bursts of flame
sputtering from the chimney.
The main thing I had watch was the temperature. Hydrazine breaking
down is extremely exothermic. So I’d do it a bit at a time, constantly
watching the readout of a thermocouple I’d attached to the iridium
chamber.
Point is, the process worked!
Each Hydrazine tank holds a little over 50L, which would be enough
to make 100L of water. I’m limited by my oxygen production, but I’m all
excited now, so I'm willing to use half my reserves. Long story short, I’ll
stop when the tank is half-empty, and I’ll have 50L or water at the end!
LOG ENTRY: SOL 34
Well that took a really long time. I’ve been at it all night with the
Hydrazine. But I got the job done.
I could have finished faster, but I figured caution’s best when setting
fire to rocket fuel in an enclosed space.
Boy is this place a tropical jungle now, I’ll tell ya.
It’s almost 30C in here, and humid as all hell. I just dumped a ton of
heat and 50L of water in to the air.
During this process, the poor Hab had to be the mother of a messy
toddler. It’s been replacing the oxygen I’ve used, and the Water
Reclaimer is trying to get the humidity down to sane levels. Nothing to be
done about the heat. There’s actually no air-conditioning in the Hab.
Mars is cold. Getting rid of excess heat isn’t something we expected to
deal with.
I’ve now grown accustomed to the alarms that are blaring at all times.
The fire alarm has finally stopped, now that there’s no more fire. The low
oxygen alarm should stop soon. The high humidity alarm will take a little
longer. The Water Reclaimer has its work cut out for it today.
For a moment, there yet another alarm. The Water Reclaimer’s main
tank was full. Booyah! That’s the kind of problem I want to have!
Remember	the	spacesuit	I	vandalized yesterday?	I	hung it	on its	rack
and carried buckets	of	water	to it	from	the	reclaimer. It	can hold an
atmosphere	of	air	in. It	should be	able	to handle	a	few	buckets	of	water.
Man I’m	tired. Been up all	night	and it’s	time	to sleep. But	I’ll	drift
off	to dreamland in the	best	mood I’ve	been in since	Sol	6.
Things	are	finally going my way. In fact, they’re	going great!	I	have	a
chance	to live	after	all!
LOG	ENTRY:	SOL	37
I	am	....	and	I’m	gonna	die!
Ok,	calm	down.	I’m	sure	I	can	get	around	this.
I’m	writing	this	log	to	you,	dear	future	Mars	archeologist,	from	Rover
2. You may wonder	why I’m	not	in the	Hab right	now. Because	I	fled in
terror, that’s	why!	And I’m	not	sure	what	the	hell	to do next.
I	guess	I	should explain what	happened. If	this	is	my last	entry, you’ll
at	least	know	why.
Over	the	past	few	days, I've	been happily making water. It’s	been
going swimmingly. (See	what	I	did there?	“swimmingly”)
I	even beefed up the	MAV	fuel	plant	compressor. It	was	very
technical	(I	increased the	voltage	to the	pump). So I’m	making water
even faster	now.
After	my initial	burst	of	50L, I	decided to settle	down and just	make	it
at	the	rate	I	get	O2. I’m	not	willing to go below	a	25L	reserve. So when I
dip too low, I	stop dicking with Hydrazine	until	I	get	the	O2 back up to
well	above	25L.
Important	note:	When I	say I	made	50L	of	water, that	was	an
assumption. I	didn’t	*reclaim* 50L	of	water. The	additional	soil	I’d filled
the	Hab with was	extremely dry and greedily sucked up a	lot	of	the
humidity. That’s	where	I	want	the	water	to go anyway, so I’m	not
worried, and I	wasn’t	surprised when the	reclaimer	didn’t	get	anywhere
near	50L.
I	get	10L	of	CO2 every 15 hours	now	that	I	souped up the	pump. I’ve
done	this	process	four	times. My math tells	me	that, including my initial
50L	burst, I	should have	130L	of	water	added to the	system.
Well	my math is	a	damn liar!
I’ve	gained 70L	in the	water	regulator	and the	spacesuit-nowwatertank.
There’s	plenty of	condensation on the	walls	and domed roof,
and the	soil	is	certainly absorbing its	fair	share. But	that	doesn’t	account
for	60L	of	missing water. Something was	wrong.
That’s	when I	noticed the	other	O2 tank.
The	Hab has	two reserve	O2 tanks. One	on each side	of	the	structure,
for	safety reasons. The	Hab can decide	which one	to use	whenever	it
wants. Turns	out	it’s	been topping off	the	atmosphere	from	Tank 1. But
when I	add O2 to the	system	(via	the	Oxygenator), the	Hab evenly
distributes	the	gain among the	two tanks. Tank 2 has	been slowly gaining
oxygen.
That’s	not	a	problem, it’s	just	doing its	job. But	it	does	mean I’ve
been gaining O2 over	time. Which means	I’m	not	consuming it	as	fast	as
I	thought.
At	first, I	thought	“Yay!	More	oxygen!	Now	I	can make	water	faster!”
But	then a	more	disturbing thought	occurred to me.
Follow	my logic:	I’m	gaining O2. But	the	amount	I’m	bringing in
from	outside	is	constant. So the	only way to “gain”	it	is	to be	using less
than I	thought. But	I’ve	been doing the	Hydrazine	reaction with the
assumption that	I	was	using all	of	it.
The	only possible	explanation is	I	haven’t	been burning all	the
released hydrogen.
It’s	obvious	now, in retrospect. But	it	never	occurred to me	that	some
of	the	hydrogen just	wouldn’t	burn. It	got	past	the	flame, and went	on its
merry way. Dammit, Jim, I’m	a	botanist, not	a	chemist!
Chemistry	is	messy,	so	there's	unburned	Hydrogen	in	the	air.	All
around	me.	Mixed	in	with	the	oxygen.	Just...	hanging	out.	Waiting	for	a
spark	so	it	can	blow	the	....	Hab	up!
Once	I	figured this	out, and composed myself, I	got	a	Ziploc-sized
sample	bag and waved it	around a	bit, then sealed it.
Then, a	quick EVA	to a	rover, where	we	keep the	atmospheric
analyzers. Nitrogen: 22%. Oxygen: 9%. Hydrogen: 64%.
I’ve been hiding here in the rover ever since.
It’s Hydrogenville in the Hab.
I’m very lucky it hasn’t blown. Even a small static discharge would
have led to “Oh the humanity!”
So, I’m here in Rover 2. I can stay for a day or two, tops, before the
CO2 filters from the rover and my spacesuit fill up. I have that long to
figure out how to deal with this.
The Hab is now a bomb.
Chapter 5
LOG ENTRY: SOL 38
I’m still cowering in the rover, but I’ve had time to think. And I know
how to deal with the hydrogen.
I thought about the Atmospheric Regulator. It pays attention to what’s
in the air and balances it. That’s how the excess O2 I've been importing
ends up in the tanks. Problem is, it’s just not built to pull hydrogen out of
the air.
The regulator uses freeze-separation to sort out the gasses. When it
decides there’s too much oxygen, it starts collecting air in a tank and
cooling it to 90 kelvin. That makes the oxygen turn to liquid, but leaves
the nitrogen (condensation point: 77K) still gaseous. Then it stores the
O2.
But I can’t get it to do that for hydrogen, because hydrogen needs to
be below 21K to turn liquid. And the regulator just can’t get temperatures
that low. Dead end.
Here’s the solution:
Hydrogen is dangerous because it can blow up. But it can only blow
up if there’s oxygen around. Hydrogen without oxygen is harmless. And
the regulator is all about pulling oxygen out of the air.
There are four different safety interlocks that prevent the regulator
from letting the Hab’s oxygen content get too low. But they’re designed
to work against technical faults, not deliberate sabotage (bwa ha ha!).
Long story short, I can trick the regulator in to pulling all the oxygen
out of the Hab. Then I can wear a spacesuit (so I can breathe) and do
whatever I want without fear of blowing up. Yay!
I’ll use an O2 tank to spray short bursts of oxygen at the hydrogen,
and make a spark with a couple of wires and a battery. It’ll set the
hydrogen on fire, but only until the small bit of oxygen is used up.
I’ll just do that over and over, in controlled bursts, until I’ve burned
off all the hydrogen.
One tiny flaw with that plan: It’ll kill my dirt.
The dirt is only viable soil because of the bacteria growing in it. If I
get rid of all the oxygen, the bacteria will die. I don’t have 100 billion
little spacesuits handy.
It’s half a solution anyway.
Time to take a break from thinking.
Commander Lewis was the last one to use this rover. She was
scheduled to use it again on Sol 7, but she went home instead. Her
personal travel kit’s still in the back. Rifling through it, I found a protein
bar and a personal USB, probably full of music to listen to on the drive.
Time to chow down and see what the good Commander brought along
for music.
LOG ENTRY SOL 38 (2)
Disco. God damn it, Lewis.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 39
Well I think I’ve got it.
Soil bacteria are used to winters. They get less active, and require less
oxygen to survive. I can lower the Hab temperature to 1C, and they’ll
nearly hibernate. This sort of thing happens on Earth all the time. They
can survive a couple of days this way. If you’re wondering how bacteria
survive long periods of cold on Earth, the answer is they don’t. Bacteria
further underground where it was warmer breed upward to replace the
dead ones.
They’ll still need some oxygen, but not much. I think a 1% content
will do the trick. That leaves a little in the air for the bacteria to breathe,
but not enough to maintain a fire. So the hydrogen won’t blow up.
But that leads to yet another problem. The potato plants won’t like the
plan.
They don’t mind the lack of oxygen but the cold will kill them. So I’ll
have to pot them (bag them, actually) and move them to a rover. They
haven’t even sprouted yet, so it’s not like they need light.
It was surprisingly annoying to find a way to make the heat stay on
when the rover’s unoccupied. But I figured it out. After all, I’ve got
nothing but time in here.
So that’s the plan. First, bag the potato plants and bring them to the
rover (make sure it keeps the damn heater on). Then drop the Hab
temperature to 1C. Then reduce to O2 content to 1%. Then burn off the
hydrogen with a battery, some wires, and a tank of O2.
Yeah. This all sounds like a great idea with no chance of catastrophic
failure.
That was sarcasm, by the way.
Well, off I go.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 40
Things weren’t 100% successful.
They say no plan survives first contact with implementation. I’d have
to agree. Here’s what happened:
I summoned up the courage to return to the Hab. Once I got there, I
felt a little more confident. Everything was how I’d left it (what did I
expect? Martians looting my stuff?)
It would take a while to let the Hab cool, so I started that right away
by turning the temperature down to 1C.
I bagged the potato plants, and got a chance to check up on them
while I was at it. They’re rooting nicely and about to sprout. One thing I
hadn’t accounted for was how to bring them from the Hab to the rovers.
The answer was pretty easy. I put all of them in Martinez’s spacesuit.
Then I dragged it out with me to the rover I’d set up as a temporary
nursery.
Making sure to jimmy the heater to stay on, I headed back to the Hab.
Buy the time I got back, it was already chilly. Down to 5C already.
Shivering and seeing my breath condense in front of me, I threw on extra
layers of clothes. Fortunately I’m not a very big man. Martinez’s clothes
fit over mine, and Vogel’s fit over Martinez’s. These shitty clothes were
designed to be worn in a temperature-controlled environment. Even with
three layers, I was still cold. I climbed in to my bunk and under the
covers for more warmth.
Once the temperature got to 1C, I waited another hour, just to make
sure the bacteria in the dirt got the memo that it was time to take it slow.
The next problem I ran in to was the regulator. Despite my
swaggering confidence, I wasn’t able to outwit it. It really does not want
to pull too much O2 out of the air. The lowest I could get it to was 15%.
After that, it flatly refused to go lower, and nothing I did mattered. I had
all these plans about getting in and reprogramming it. But the safety
protocols turned out to be in ROMs.
I can’t blame it. Its whole purpose is to prevent the atmosphere from
becoming lethal. Nobody at NASA thought “Hey, let’s allow a fatal lack
of oxygen that will make everyone drop dead!”
So I had to use more a more primitive plan.
The regulator uses a different set of vents for air sampling than it
does for main air separation. The air that gets freeze-separated comes in
through a single large vent on the main unit. But it samples the air from
nine small vents that pipe back to the main unit. That way it gets a good
average of the Hab, and prevents one localized imbalance from throwing
it off.
I taped up eight of the intakes, leaving only one of them active. Then I
taped the mouth of a Hefty-sized bag over the neck-hole of a spacesuit
(Johanssen’s this time). In the back of the bag, I poked a small hole and
taped it over the remaining intake.
Then I inflated the bag with pure O2 from the suit’s tanks. “Holy
shit!” the regulator thought,
“I better pull O2 out right away!”
Worked great!
I decided I not to wear a space suit after all. The atmospheric pressure
was going to be fine. All I needed was oxygen. So I grabbed an O2
canister from the medical bay. That way, I had a hell of a lot more
freedom of motion. It even had a rubber band to keep it on my face!
Though I did need a spacesuit to monitor the actual Hab oxygen level
(The Hab’s main computer was convinced it was 100% O2). Each
spacesuit knew how to monitor its own internal air, of course.
Let’s see… Martinez’s spacesuit was in the rover. Johanssen’s was
outwitting the regulator. Lewis’s was serving as a water-tank. I didn’t
want to mess with mine (hey, it’s custom fitted!). That left me three
spacesuits to work with.
I grabbed Vogel’s suit and activated the internal air sensors while
leaving the helmet off. Once the oxygen dropped to 12% I put the
breather mask on. I watched it fall further and further. When it reached
1% I cut power to the regulator.
I may not be able to reprogram the regulator, but I can turn the
bastard off completely.
The Hab has emergency flashlights in many locations in case of
critical power failure. I tore the L.E.D. bulbs out of one and left the two
frayed power wires very close together. Now when I turned it on I got a
small spark.
Taking a canister of O2 from Vogel’s suit, I attached a strap to both
ends and slung it over my shoulder. Then I attached an air line to the tank
and crimped it with my thumb. I turned on a very slow trickle of O2; a
small enough that it couldn’t overpower the crimp.
Standing on the table with a sparker in one hand and my oxygen line
in the other, I reached up and gave it a try.
And holy hell it worked! Blowing the O2 over the sparker, I flicked
the switch on the flashlight and a wonderful jet of flame fired out of the
tube. The fire alarm went off, of course. But I’d heard it so much lately I
barely noticed it any more.
Then I did it again. And again. Short bursts. Nothing flashy. I was
happy to take my time.
I was elated! This was the best plan ever! Not only was I clearing out
the hydrogen, I was making more water!
Everything went great right up to the explosion.
One minute I was happily burning hydrogen; the next I was on the
other side of the Hab and a lot of stuff was knocked over. I stumbled to
my feet and saw the Hab in disarray.
My first thought was “My ears hurt like hell!”
Then I thought “I’m dizzy,
” and fell to my knees. Then I fell prone. I
was that dizzy. I groped my head with both hands, looking for a headwound
I desperately hoped would not be there. Nothing seemed to be
amiss.
But feeling all over my head and face revealed the true problem. My
oxygen mask had been ripped off in the blast. I was breathing nearly pure
nitrogen.
The floor was covered in junk from all over the Hab. No hope of
finding the medical O2 tank. No hope of finding anything in this mess
before I passed out.
Then I saw Lewis’s suit hanging right where it belonged. It hadn’t
moved in the blast. It was heavy to start with and had 70L of water in it.
Rushing over, I quickly cranked on the O2 and stuck my head into the
neck-hole (I’d removed the helmet long ago, for easy access to the
water). I breathed a bit until the dizziness faded, then took a deep breath
and held it.
Still holding my breath, I glanced over to the spacesuit and Hefty bag
I’d used to outsmart the regulator. The bad news is I’d never removed
them. The good news is the explosion removed them. Eight of the nine
intakes for the regulator were still bagged, but this one would at least tell
the truth.
Stumbling over to the regulator, I turned it back on.
After a two second boot process (it was made to start up fast for
obvious reasons) it immediately identified the problem.
The shrill low-oxygen alarm blared throughout the Hab as the
regulator dumped pure oxygen in to the atmosphere as fast as it safely
could. Separating oxygen from the atmosphere is difficult and time
consuming, but adding it is as simple as opening a valve.
I clambered over debris back to Lewis’s spacesuit and put my head
back in for more good air. Within three minutes, the regulator had
brought the Hab oxygen back up to par.
I noticed for the first time how burned my clothing was. It was a good
time to be wearing three layers of clothes. Mostly the damage was on my
sleves. The outer layer was gone. The middle layer was singed and burned
clean through in places. The inner layer, my own uniform, was in
reasonably good shape. Looks like I lucked out again.
Also, glancing at the Hab’s main computer, I see the temperature rose
to 15C. Something very hot and very explodey happened, and I wasn’t
sure what. Or how.
And that’s where I am now. Wondering what the hell happened.
After all that work and getting blown up, I’m exhausted. Tomorrow
I’ll have to do a million equipment checks and try to figure out what blew
up, but for now I just want to sleep.
I’m in the rover again tonight. Even with the hydrogen gone, I’m
reluctant to hang out in a Hab that has a history of exploding for no
reason. Plus, I can’t be sure there isn’t a leak.
This time, I brought a proper meal, and something to listen to that
isn’t disco.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 41
I spent the day running full diagnostics on every system in the Hab. It
was incredibly boring, but my survival depends on these machines, so it
had to be done. I can’t just assume an explosion did no long-term
damage.
I did the most critical tests first. Number one was the integrity of the
Hab canvas. I felt pretty confident it was in good shape, cause I’d spent a
few hours asleep in the rover before returning to the Hab, and the
pressure was still good. The computer reported no change pressure over
that time, other than a minor fluctuation based on temperature.
Then I checked the Oxygenator. If that stops working and I can’t fix
it, I’m a dead man. No problems.
Then the Atmospheric Regulator. Again, no problem.
Heating unit, primary battery array, O2 and N2 storage tanks, Water
Reclaimer, all	three	airlocks, lighting systems, main computer… on and
on I	went, feeling better	and better	as	each system	proved to be	in perfect
working order.
Got	to	hand	it	to	NASA.	They	don’t	....	around	when	making	this
stuff.
Then came	the	critical	part… checking the	dirt. Taking a	few	samples
from	all	over	the	Hab (remember, it’s	all	dirt	flooring now), I	made	some
slides.
I	took them	over	to the	microscope	and checked up on my beloved
bacteria. I	breathed a	sigh of	relief	when I	saw	healthy, active	bacteria
doing their	thing.
Then I	set	about	cleaning up the	mess. And I	had a	lot	of	time	to think
about	what	had happened.
So what	happened?	Well, I	have	a	theory.
According to the	main computer, during the	blast, the	internal
pressure	spiked to 1.4 atmospheres, and the	temperature	rose	to 15C	in
under	a	second. But	the	pressure	quickly subsided back to 1atm. This
would make	sense	if	the	Atmospheric	Regulator	were	on, but	I’d cut
power	to it.
The	temperature	remained 15C	for	some	time	afterward, so any heat
expansion should still	have	been present. But	the	pressure	dropped down
again, so where	did that	extra	pressure	go?	Raising the	temperature	and
keeping the	same	number	of	atoms	inside	should permanently raise	the
pressure. But	it	didn’t.
I	quickly realized the	answer. The	hydrogen (the	only available	thing
to burn)	combined with oxygen (hence	combustion)	and became	water.
Water	is	a	thousand times	as	dense	as	a	gas. So the	heat	added to the
pressure, and the	transformation of	hydrogen and oxygen in to water
brought	it	back down again.
The	million dollar	question is:	Where	the	hell	did the	oxygen come
from?	The	whole	plan was	to limit	oxygen and keep an explosion from
happening. And it	was	working for	quite	a	while	before	blowing up.
I	think I	have	my answer. And it	comes	down to me	brain-farting.
Remember	when I	decided not	to wear	a	spacesuit?	That	decision almost
killed me.
The medical O2 tank mixes pure oxygen with surrounding air, then
feeds it to you through a mask. The mask stays on your face with a little
rubber band that goes around the back of your neck. Not an air-tight seal.
I know what you’re thinking. The mask leaked oxygen. But no. I was
breathing the oxygen. When I was inhaling, I made a nearly airtight seal
with the mask by sucking it to my face.
The problem was the exhale. Do you know how much oxygen you
absorb out of the air when you take a normal breath? I don’t know either,
but it’s not 100%. With every breath, I was taking in oxygen, my lungs
grabbed some of it, then I was breathing it out into the Hab. Every time I
exhaled, I added more oxygen to the system.
It just didn’t occur to me. But it should have. If your lungs grabbed up
all the oxygen, mouth-to-mouth resuscitation wouldn’t work. I’m such a
dumb-ass for not thinking of it! And my dumbassery almost got me
killed!
I’m really going to have to be more careful.
It’s a good thing I burned off most of the hydrogen before the
explosion. Otherwise that would have been the end. As it is, the explosion
wasn’t strong enough to pop the Hab. Though it was strong enough to
almost blast my eardrums in.
The Water Reclaimer did its job last night and pulled another 50L of
water out of the air. Long ago before hydrogen became the focus of my
life, my problem was the 60L shortfall in water production. 50L of it is
now in Lewis’s spacesuit, which I’ll call “The Cistern” from now on
because it sounds cooler. The other 10L of water was absorbed by the dry
soil.
Lots of physical labor today. I’ve earned a full meal. And to celebrate
my first night back in the Hab, I’ll kick back and watch some shitty 20th
century TV courtesy of Commander Lewis.
“The Dukes of Hazzard,
” eh? Let’s give it a whirl.
LOG ENTRY: SOL 42
I	slept	in late	today. I	deserved it. After	four	nights	of	awful	sleep in
the	rover, my bunk felt	like	the	softest, most	profoundly beautiful
featherbed ever	made.
Anyway, I	dragged my ass	out	of	bed and finished some	postexplosion
cleanup.
I	moved	the	potato	plants	back	in	today.	And	just	in	time,	too.
They’re	sprouting.	They	look	healthy	and	happy.	This	isn’t	chemistry,
medicine,	bacteriology,	nutrition	analysis,	explosion	dynamics,	or	any
other	shit	I’ve	been	doing	lately,	this	is	botany.	I’m	sure	I	can	at	least
grow	some	plants	without	....	up.
Right?
You know	what	really sucks?	I’ve	only made	130L	of	water. I	have
another	470L	to go. You’d think after	almost	killing myself	twice, I’d
stop screwing around with hydrazine. But	nope. I’ll	be	reducing
hydrazine	and burning hydrogen in the	Hab, every 10 hours, for	another
10 days. Let’s	hope	I	do a	better	job of	it	from	now	on.
I’ll	have	a	lot	of	dead time. 10 hours	for	each tank of	C02 to finish
filling. It	only takes	20 minutes	to reduce	the	hydrazine	and burn the
hydrogen. I’ll	spend the	rest	of	the	time	watching TV.
And seriously… It’s	clear	the	General	Lee	can outrun a	police	cruiser.
Why doesn’t	Roscoe	just	go to the	Duke	farm	and arrest	them	when
they’re	not in the	car?
Chapter 6
Venkat returned to his office, dropped his briefcase on the floor, and
collapsed into his leather chair. He took a moment to look out the
windows at his scenic view of the Johnson Space Center.
Glancing at his computer screen, he noted 47 unread emails urgently
demanding his attention. They could wait. Today had been a sad day.
Today was the memorial service for Mark Watney.
The President had given a speech, praising Watney’s bravery and
sacrifice, and the quick actions of Commander Lewis in getting everyone
else to safety. Commander Lewis and the surviving crew, via long range
communication from Hermes, gave eulogies to their departed comrade
from deep space. They had another ten months of travel yet to endure.
The Director had given a speech as well, reminding everyone that
space flight is incredibly dangerous, and how we will not back down in
the face of adversity.
During preparation for the service, they’d asked Venkat if he was
willing to make a speech. He’d declined. What was the point? Watney
was dead. Nice words form the Director of Mars Missions wouldn’t bring
him back.
“You ok, Venk?” came a voice from the doorway.
Venkat swiveled around. “Guess so,
” he said.
“You could have given a speech.”
“I didn’t want to. You know that.”
“Yeah, I know. I didn’t want to, either. But I’m the director of NASA.
It’s kind of expected. You sure you’re ok?”
“Yeah, I’ll be fine.”
“Good,
” Teddy said, walking in. “Let’s get back to work, then.”
“Sure,
” Venkat shrugged. “Let’s start with you authorizing my
satellite time.”
Teddy leaned against the wall with a sigh. “This again.”
“Yes,
” Venkat said. “This again. What is the problem?”
“Ok, run me through it. What, exactly, are you after?”
Venkat leaned forward. “Ares 3 was a failure, but we can salvage
something from it. We’re funded for five Ares missions. I think we can
get Congress to fund a sixth.”
“I don’t know, Venk…”
“It’s simple, Teddy,
” Venkat pressed on. “They evac’d after six sols.
There’s almost an entire mission worth of supplies up there. It would
only cost a fraction of a normal mission. It normally takes 14 presupply
probes to prep a site. We might be able to send what’s missing in three.
Maybe two.”
“Venk, the site got hit by a 175 km/h sandstorm. It’ll be in really bad
shape.”
“That’s why I want imagery,
” Venkat explained. “I just need a couple
of shots of the site. We could learn a lot.”
“Like what? You think we’d send people to Mars without being sure
everything was in perfect working order?”
“Everything doesn’t have to be perfect,
” Venkat said quickly.
“Whatever’s broken, we’d send replacements for. The only thing that
needs to work is the MAV. And we’d have to send a fresh one anyway.”
“How will we know from imagery what’s broken?”
“It’s just a first step. They evac’d because the wind was a threat to the
MAV, but the Hab can withstand a lot more punishment. It might still be
in one piece.
“And it’ll be really obvious. If it popped, it’d completely blow out
and collapse. If it’s still standing, then everything inside will be fine. And
the rovers are solid. They can take any sandstorm Mars has to offer. Just
let me take a look, Teddy, that’s all I want.”
Teddy looked down,
“You’re not the only guy who wants satellite
time, you know. We have Ares 4 supply missions coming up. We need to
concentrate on Schiaparelli Crater.”
“I don't get it, Teddy. What's the problem here?” Venkat asked. “I’m
talking about securing us another mission. We have 12 satellites in orbit
around Mars, I’m sure you can spare one or two for a couple of hours. I
can give you the windows for each one when they’ll be at the right angle
for Ares 3 shots-“
“It’s not about satellite time, Venk,
” Teddy interrupted.
Venkat froze. “Then… but… what…”
Teddy looked down. “We’re a public domain organization. There’s no
such thing as secret or secure information here.”
“So?”
“Any imagery we take goes directly to the public.”
“Again: so?”
“Mark Watney’s body will be within a twenty meters of the Hab.
Maybe partially buried in sand, but still very visible, and with a comm
antenna sticking out of his chest. Any images we take will show that.”
Venkat stared. Then glared. “This is why you denied my imagery
requests for two months?”
“Venk, come on-“
“Really, Teddy?” he said. “You’re afraid of a PR problem?”
“The media’s obsession with Watney’s death is finally starting to
taper off,
” Teddy said evenly. “It’s been bad press after bad press for two
months. Today’s memorial gives people closure, and the media can move
on to some other story. The last thing we want to do is dredge everything
back up.”
“So what do we do, then? He’s not going to decompose. He’ll be there
forever.”
“Not forever,
” Teddy said. “Within a year, he’ll be covered in sand
from normal weather activity.”
“A year?” Venkat said, rising to his feet. “That’s ludicrous. We can’t
wait a year for this.”
“Why not? Ares 5 won’t even launch for another five years. Plenty of
time.”
Venkat took a deep breath and thought for a moment.
“Ok, consider this,
” he said. “Sympathy for Watney’s family is really
high. Ares 6 could bring the body back. We don’t say that’s the purpose
of the mission, but we make it clear that would be part of it. If we framed
it that way, we’d get more support in Congress. But not if we wait a year.
In a year, people won’t care any more.”
Teddy rubbed his chin. “Hmm…”
Mindy stared at the ceiling. She had little else to do. The 3am shift
was pretty dull. Only a constant stream of coffee kept her awake.
Monitoring the status of satellites around Mars sounded like an
exciting proposition when she took the transfer. But the satellites tended
to take care of themselves. Her job turned out to be sending emails as
imagery became available.
“Master’s Degree in Mechanical Engineering,
” she grumbled to
herself. “And I’m working in an all-night photo booth.”
She sipped her coffee.
A flicker on her screen announced another set of images were ready
for dispatch. She checked the name on the work order. Venkat Kapoor.
Posting the data directly to internal servers, she composed an email to
Dr. Kapoor. As she entered the latitude and longitude of the image, she
recognized the numbers.
“31.2°N, 28.5°W… Acidalia Planitia… Ares 3?”
Out of curiosity, she brought up the first of the 17 images.
As she suspected, it was the Ares 3 site. She’d heard they were going
to image it. Slightly ashamed of herself, she scoured the image for any
sign on Mark Watney’s dead body. After a minute of fruitless searching,
she was simultaneously relieved and disappointed.
She moved on to perusing the rest of the image. The Hab was intact;
Dr. Kapoor would be happy to see that.
She brought the coffee mug to her lips, then froze.
“Um…” she mumbled to herself. “Uhhh…”
Quickly bringing up the NASA intranet, she navigated through the
site to the specifics of the Ares missions. After some quick research, she
picked up her phone.
“Hey, this is Mindy Park at SatCon. I need the mission logs for Ares
3, where can I get ‘em?... Uh huh… uh-huh…. Ok… Thanks.”
After some more time on the intranet, she leaned back in her seat. She
no longer needed the coffee to keep awake.
Picking up the phone again,
“Hello, Security? This is Mindy Park in
SatCon. I need the emergency contact number for Dr. Venkat Kapoor…
Yes, the Director of Mars Missions… Yes it’s and emergency.”
Mindy fidgeted in her seat as Venkat trudged in.
“You Mindy Park?” He asked, looking mildly annoyed.
“Yeah,
” she quavered. “Sorry to drag you in.”
“I’m assuming you had a good reason. So?”
“Um,
” she said, looking down. “Um, it’s. Well. The imagery you
ordered. Um. Come here and look.”
He pulled another chair to her station and seated himself. “Is this
about Watney’s body? Is that why you’re shook up?”
“Um, no,
” she said. “Um. Well… uh.” She pointed to the screen.
Venkat inspected the image. “Looks like the Hab’s in one piece.
That’s good news. Solar array looks good. The rovers are ok, too. Main
dish isn’t around. No surprise there. What’s the big emergency?”
“Um,
” she said, touching her finger to the screen. “That.”
Venkat leaned in and looked closer. Just below the Hab, beside the
rovers, two white circles sat in the sand. “Hmm. Looks like Hab canvas.
Maybe the Hab didn’t do well after all? I guess pieces got torn off and-“
“Um,
” she interrupted. “They look like rover pop-tents.”
Venkat looked again. “Hmm. Probably right.”
“How’d they get set up?” Mindy asked.
Venkat shrugged. “Commander Lewis probably ordered them
deployed during the evac. Not a bad idea. Have the emergency shelters
ready in case the MAV didn’t work and the Hab breached.”
“Yeah, um,
” Mindy said, opening a document on her computer. “This
is the entire mission log for Sols 1 through 6. From MDV touchdown to
MAV emergency liftoff.”
“Ok, and?”
“I read through it. Several times. They never threw out the pop tents.”
Her voice cracked at the last word.
“Well, uh…” Venkat said, puzzled. “They obviously did, but it didn’t
make it in to the log.”
“They activated two emergency pop tents and never told anyone?”
“Hmm. That doesn’t make a lot of sense, no. Maybe the storm messed