Chapters
on Ancient Egyptian History and Archæology
BY
ARTHUR E.P.B. WEIGALL
INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF UPPER EGYPT, DEPARTMENT OF ANTIQUITIES
AUTHOR OF 'TRAVELS IN THE UPPER EGYPTIAN DESERTS,' 'THE LIFE AND TIMES OF
AKHNATON, PHARAOH OF EGYPT,' 'A GUIDE TO THE ANTIQUITIES OF UPPER EGYPT,' ETC.,
ETC.
.............................................................
_TO
ALAN H. GARDINER, ESQ.,
M.A., D.LITT.
LAYCOCK STUDENT OF EGYPTOLOGY AT WORCESTER COLLEGE, OXFORD,
THIS BOOK,
WHICH WILL RECALL SOME SUMMER NIGHTS UPON THE THEBAN HILLS,
IS DEDICATED._
.................................................................
PREFACE.
No person who has travelled in Egypt will require to be told that it is a country in which a considerable
amount of waiting and waste of time has to be endured. One makes an excursion by train to see some ruins,
and, upon returning to the station, the train is found to be late, and an hour or more has to be dawdled away.
Crossing the Nile in a rowing-boat the sailors contrive in one way or another to prolong the journey to a
length of half an hour or more. The excursion steamer will run upon a sandbank, and will there remain fast for
a part of the day.
The resident official, travelling from place to place, spends a great deal of time seated in railway stations or on
the banks of the Nile, waiting for his train or his boat to arrive; and he has, therefore, a great deal of time for
thinking. I often try to fill in these dreary periods by jotting down a few notes on some matter which has
recently been discussed, or registering and elaborating arguments which have chanced lately to come into the
thoughts. These notes are shaped and "written up" when next there is a spare hour, and a few books to refer to;
and ultimately they take the form of articles or papers, some of which find their way into print.
This volume contains twelve chapters, written at various times and in various places, each dealing with some
subject drawn from the great treasury of Ancient Egypt. Some of the chapters have appeared as articles in
magazines.
Chapters
iv., v., and viii. were published in 'Blackwood's Magazine'; chapter vii. in 'Putnam's Magazine' and the 'Pall
Mall Magazine'; and chapter ix. in the 'Century Magazine.' I have to thank the editors for allowing me to
reprint them here. The remaining seven chapters have been written specially for this volume.
LUXOR, UPPER EGYPT, November 1910.
...........................................................
CONTENTS.
PART I.--THE VALUE OF THE TREASURY.
CHAP. PAGE I. THE VALUE OF ARCHÆOLOGY 3
II. THE EGYPTIAN EMPIRE 26
Chapters 2
III. THE NECESSITY OF ARCHÆOLOGY TO THE GAIETY OF THE WORLD 55


PART II.--STUDIES IN THE TREASURY.
IV. THE TEMPERAMENT OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS 81
V. THE MISFORTUNES OF WENAMON 112
VI. THE STORY OF THE SHIPWRECKED SAILOR 138

PART III.--RESEARCHES IN THE TREASURY.
VII. RECENT EXCAVATIONS IN EGYPT 165
VIII. THE TOMB OF TIY AND AKHNATON 185
IX. THE TOMB OF HOREMHEB 209

PART IV.--THE PRESERVATION OF THE TREASURY.
X. THEBAN THIEVES 239
XI. THE FLOODING OF LOWER NUBIA 262*
XII. ARCHÆOLOGY IN THE OPEN 281**

* Transcriber's note: Original text incorrectly lists page number "261". **Transcriber's note: Original text
incorrectly lists page number "282".
.......................................................................

ILLUSTRATIONS.
PLATE PAGE
A STATUE OF THE HAWK-GOD HORUS IN FRONT OF THE TEMPLE OF EDFU. THE AUTHOR
STANDS BESIDE IT Frontispiece I. THE MUMMY OF RAMESES II. OF DYNASTY XIX. 10
II. WOOD AND ENAMEL JEWEL-CASE DISCOVERED IN THE TOMB OF YUAA AND TUAU. AN
EXAMPLE OF THE FURNITURE OF ONE OF THE BEST PERIODS OF ANCIENT EGYPTIAN ART 17
III. HEAVY GOLD EARRINGS OF QUEEN TAUSERT OF DYNASTY XX. AN EXAMPLE OF THE
WORK OF ANCIENT EGYPTIAN GOLDSMITHS 22
IV. IN THE PALM-GROVES NEAR SAKKÂRA, EGYPT 36
V. THE MUMMY OF SETY I. OF DYNASTY XIX. 48
VI. A RELIEF UPON THE SIDE OF THE SARCOPHAGUS OF ONE OF THE WIVES OF KING
MENTUHOTEP III., DISCOVERED AT DÊR EL BAHRI (THEBES). THE ROYAL LADY IS TAKING
PART I.--THE VALUE OF THE TREASURY. 3
SWEET-SMELLING OINTMENT FROM AN ALABASTER VASE. A HANDMAIDEN KEEPS THE
FLIES AWAY WITH A BIRD'S-WING FAN. 62
VII. LADY ROUGING HERSELF: SHE HOLDS A MIRROR AND ROUGE-POT 71
DANCING GIRL TURNING A BACK SOMERSAULT 71
VIII. TWO EGYPTIAN BOYS DECKED WITH FLOWERS AND A THIRD HOLDING A MUSICAL
INSTRUMENT. THEY ARE STANDING AGAINST THE OUTSIDE WALL OF THE DENDEREH
TEMPLE 82
IX. A GARLAND OF LEAVES AND FLOWERS DATING FROM ABOUT B.C. 1000. IT WAS PLACED
UPON THE NECK OF A MUMMY 94
X. A RELIEF OF THE SAITIC PERIOD, REPRESENTING AN OLD MAN PLAYING UPON A HARP,
AND A WOMAN BEATING A DRUM. OFFERINGS OF FOOD AND FLOWERS ARE PLACED
BEFORE THEM 100
XI. AN EGYPTIAN NOBLE OF THE EIGHTEENTH DYNASTY HUNTING BIRDS WITH A
BOOMERANG AND DECOYS. HE STANDS IN A REED-BOAT WHICH FLOATS AMIDST THE
PAPYRUS CLUMPS, AND A CAT RETRIEVES THE FALLEN BIRDS. IN THE BOAT WITH HIM ARE
HIS WIFE AND SON 108
XII. A REED BOX FOR HOLDING CLOTHING, DISCOVERED IN THE TOMB OF YUAA AND TUAU
118
XIII. A FESTIVAL SCENE OF SINGERS AND DANCERS FROM A TOMB-PAINTING OF DYNASTY
XVII. 133
XIV. A SAILOR OF LOWER NUBIA AND HIS SON 144
XV. A NILE BOAT PASSING THE HILLS OF THEBES 159
XVI. THE EXCAVATIONS ON THE SITE OF THE CITY OF ABYDOS 166
XVII. EXCAVATING THE OSIREION AT ABYDOS. A CHAIN OF BOYS HANDING UP BASKETS OF
SAND TO THE SURFACE 175
XVIII. THE ENTRANCE OF THE TOMB OF QUEEN TIY, WITH EGYPTIAN POLICEMAN STANDING
BESIDE IT. ON THE LEFT IS THE LATER TOMB OF RAMESES X. 186
XIX. TOILET-SPOONS OF CARVED WOOD, DISCOVERED IN TOMBS OF THE EIGHTEENTH
DYNASTY. THAT ON THE RIGHT HAS A MOVABLE LID 192
XX. THE COFFIN OF AKHNATON LYING IN THE TOMB OF QUEEN TIY 207
XXI. HEAD OF A GRANITE STATUE OF THE GOD KHONSU, PROBABLY DATING FROM ABOUT
THE PERIOD OF HOREMHEB 217
XXII. THE MOUTH OF THE TOMB OF HOREMHEB AT THE TIME OF ITS DISCOVERY. THE
AUTHOR IS SEEN EMERGING FROM THE TOMB AFTER THE FIRST ENTRANCE HAD BEEN
EFFECTED. ON THE HILLSIDE THE WORKMEN ARE GROUPED 229
PART IV.--THE PRESERVATION OF THE TREASURY. 4
XXIII. A MODERN THEBAN FELLAH-WOMAN AND HER CHILD 240
XXIV. A MODERN GOURNAWI BEGGAR 250
XXV. THE ISLAND AND TEMPLES OF PHILÆ WHEN THE RESERVOIR IS EMPTY 269
XXVI. A RELIEF REPRESENTING QUEEN TIY, FROM THE TOMB OF USERHAT AT THEBES. THIS
RELIEF WAS STOLEN FROM THE TOMB, AND FOUND ITS WAY TO THE BRUSSELS MUSEUM,
WHERE IT IS SHOWN IN THE DAMAGED CONDITION SEEN IN PL. XXVII. 282
XXVII. A RELIEF REPRESENTING QUEEN TIY, FROM THE TOMB OF USERHAT, THEBES. (SEE
PL. XXVI.) 293
....................................................................
PART I
THE VALUE OF THE TREASURY.
"History no longer shall be a dull book. It shall walk incarnate in every just and wise man. You shall not tell
me by languages and titles a catalogue of the volumes you have read. You shall make me feel what periods
you have lived. A man shall be the Temple of Fame. He shall walk, as the poets have described that goddess,
in a robe painted all over with wonderful events and experiences.... He shall be the priest of Pan, and bring
with him into humble cottages the blessing of the morning stars, and all the recorded benefits of heaven and
earth." EMERSON.
.....................................................................

CHAPTER I.
THE VALUE OF ARCHÆOLOGY.
The archæologist whose business it is to bring to light by pick and spade the relics of bygone ages, is often
accused of devoting his energies to work which is of no material profit to mankind at the present day.
Archæology is an unapplied science, and, apart from its connection with what is called culture, the critic is
inclined to judge it as a pleasant and worthless amusement. There is nothing, the critic tells us, of pertinent
value to be learned from the Past which will be of use to the ordinary person of the present time; and, though
the archæologist can offer acceptable information to the painter, to the theologian, to the philologist, and
indeed to most of the followers of the arts and sciences, he has nothing to give to the ordinary layman.
In some directions the imputation is unanswerable; and when the interests of modern times clash with those of
the past, as, for example, in Egypt where a beneficial reservoir has destroyed the remains of early days, there
can be no question that the recording of the threatened information and the minimising of the destruction, is
all that the value of the archæologist's work entitles him to ask for. The critic, however, usually overlooks
some of the chief reasons that archæology can give for even this much consideration, reasons which constitute
its modern usefulness; and I therefore propose to point out to him three or four of the many claims which it
may make upon the attention of the layman.
In the first place it is necessary to define the meaning of the term "Archæology." Archæology is the study of
the facts of ancient history and ancient lore. The word is applied to the study of all ancient documents and
objects which may be classed as antiquities; and the archæologist is understood to be the man who deals with
a period for which the evidence has to be excavated or otherwise discovered. The age at which an object
becomes an antiquity, however, is quite undefined, though practically it may be reckoned at a hundred years;
PART I 5
and ancient history is, after all, the tale of any period which is not modern. Thus an archæologist does not
necessarily deal solely with the remote ages.
Every chronicler of the events of the less recent times who goes to the original documents for his facts, as true
historians must do during at least a part of their studies, is an archæologist; and, conversely, every
archæologist who in the course of his work states a series of historical facts, becomes an historian.
Archæology and history are inseparable; and nothing is more detrimental to a noble science than the attitude
of certain so-called archæologists who devote their entire time to the study of a sequence of objects without
proper consideration for the history which those objects reveal. Antiquities are the relics of human mental
energy; and they can no more be classified without reference to the minds which produced them than
geological specimens can be discussed without regard to the earth. There is only one thing worse than the
attitude of the archæologist who does not study the story of the periods with which he is dealing, or construct,
if only in his thoughts, living history out of the objects discovered by him; and that is the attitude of the
historian who has not familiarised himself with the actual relics left by the people of whom he writes, or has
not, when possible, visited their lands. There are many "archæologists" who do not care a snap of the fingers
for history, surprising as this may appear; and there are many historians who take no interest in manners and
homeless, scattered over the face of the globe, the "tribe of the wandering foot and weary breast."
In no country has the archæologist been more active than in Egypt during the last half century, and the
contributions which his spade and pick have offered to history are of first-rate importance to that study as a
whole. The eye may now travel down the history of the Nile Valley from prehistoric days to the present time
almost without interruption; and now that the anthropologist has shown that the modern Egyptians,
Mussulman and Copt, peasant and townsman, belong to one and the same race of ancient Egyptians, one may
surely judge to-day's inhabitants of the country in the light of yesterday's records. In his report for the year
1906, Lord Cromer, questioning whether the modern inhabitants of the country were capable of governing
their own land, tells us that we must go back to the precedent of Pharaonic days to discover if the Egyptians
ever ruled themselves successfully.
In this pregnant remark Lord Cromer was using information which the archæologist and historian had made
accessible to him. Looking back over the history of the country, he was enabled, by the study of this
information, to range before him the succession of foreign occupations of the Nile Valley and to assess their
significance. It may be worth while to repeat the process, in order to give an example of the bearing of history
upon modern polemics, though I propose to discuss this matter more fully in another chapter.
Previous to the British occupation the country was ruled, as it is now, by a noble dynasty of Albanian princes,
whose founder was set upon the throne by the aid of Turkish and Albanian troops. From the beginning of the
sixteenth century until that time Egypt had been ruled by the Ottoman Government, the Turk having replaced
the Circassian and other foreign "Mamlukes" who had held the country by the aid of foreign troops since the
middle of the thirteenth century. For a hundred years previous to the Mamluke rule Egypt had been in the
hands of the Syrian and Arabian dynasty founded by Saladdin. The Fatimides, a North African dynasty,
governed the country before the advent of Saladdin, this family having entered Egypt under their general,
Jauhar, who was of Greek origin. In the ninth century Ahmed ibn Tulun, a Turk, governed the land with the
aid of a foreign garrison, his rule being succeeded by the Ikhshidi dynasty of foreigners. Ahmed had captured
Egypt from the Byzantines who had held it since the days of the Roman occupation. Previous to the Romans
the Ptolemies, a Greek family, had governed the Nile Valley with the help of foreign troops. The Ptolemies
had followed close upon the Greek occupation, the Greeks having replaced the Persians as rulers of Egypt.
The Persian occupation had been preceded by an Egyptian dynasty which had been kept on the throne by
Greek and other foreign garrisons. Previous to this there had been a Persian occupation, which had followed a
short period of native rule under foreign influence. We then come back to the Assyrian conquest which had
followed the Ethiopian rule. Libyan kings had held the country before the Ethiopian conquest. The XXIst and
XXth Dynasties preceded the Libyans, and here, in a disgraceful period of corrupt government, a series of
so-called native kings are met with. Foreigners, however, swarmed in the country at the time, foreign troops
were constantly used, and the Pharaohs themselves were of semi-foreign origin. One now comes back to the
early XIXth and XVIIIth Dynasties which, although largely tinged with foreign blood, may be said to have
been Egyptian families. Before the rise of the XVIIIth Dynasty the country was in foreign hands for the long
period which had followed the fall of the XIIth Dynasty, the classical period of Egyptian history (about the
twentieth century B.C.), when there were no rivals to be feared. Thus the Egyptians may be said to have been
subject to foreign occupation for nearly four thousand years, with the exception of the strong native rule of the
XVIIIth Dynasty, the semi-native rule of the three succeeding dynasties, and a few brief periods of chaotic
government in later times; and this is the information which the archæologist has to give to the statesman and
politician. It is a story of continual conquest, of foreign occupations following one upon another, of revolts
and massacres, of rapid retributions and punishments. It is the story of a nation which, however ably it may
govern itself in the future, has only once in four thousand years successfully done so in the past.
[Illustration: PL. I. The mummy of Rameses II. of Dynasty XIX. --CAIRO MUSEUM.]
[_Photo by E. Brugsch Pasha._
CHAPTER I. 7
Such information is of far-reaching value to the politician, and to those interested, as every Englishman should
be, in Imperial politics. A nation cannot alter by one jot or tittle its fundamental characteristics; and only those
who have studied those characteristics in the pages of history are competent to foresee the future. A certain
Englishman once asked the Khedive Ismail whether there was any news that day about Egyptian affairs. "That
is so like all you English," replied his Highness. "You are always expecting something new to happen in
Egypt day by day. To-day is here the same as yesterday, and to-morrow will be the same as to-day; and so it
has been, and so it will be, for thousands of years."[1] Neither Egypt nor any other nation will ever change;
and to this it is the archæologist who will bear witness with his stern law of Precedent.
[Footnote 1: E. Dicey. 'The Story of the Khedivate,' p. 528.]
I will reserve the enlarging of this subject for the next chapter: for the present we may consider, as a second
argument, the efficacy of the past as a tonic to the present, and its ability to restore the vitality of any age that
is weakened.
In ancient Egypt at the beginning of the XXVIth Dynasty (B.C. 663) the country was at a very low ebb.
Devastated by conquests, its people humiliated, its government impoverished, a general collapse of the nation
was imminent. At this critical period the Egyptians turned their minds to the glorious days of old. They
remodelled their arts and crafts upon those of the classical periods, introduced again the obsolete offices and
titles of those early times, and organised the government upon the old lines. This movement saved the
country, and averted its collapse for a few more centuries. It renewed the pride of workmanship in a decadent
people; and on all sides we see a revival which was the direct result of an archæological experiment.
The importance of archæology as a reviver of artistic and industrial culture will be realised at once if the
essential part it played in the great Italian Renaissance is called to mind. Previous to the age of Cimabue and
Giotto in Florence, Italian refinement had passed steadily down the path of deterioration. Græco-Roman art,
which still at a high level in the early centuries of the Christian era, entirely lost its originality during
Byzantine times, and the dark ages settled down upon Italy in almost every walk of life. The Venetians, for
example, were satisfied with comparatively the poorest works of art imported from Constantinople or Mount
Athos: and in Florence so great was the poverty of genius that when Cimabue in the thirteenth century painted
that famous Madonna which to our eyes appears to be of the crudest workmanship, the little advance made by
it in the direction of naturalness was received by the city with acclamations, the very street down which it was
carried being called the "Happy Street" in honour of the event. Giotto carried on his master's teachings, and a
few years later the Florentines had advanced to the standard of Fra Angelico, who was immediately followed
by the two Lippis and Botticelli. Leonardo da Vinci, artist, architect, and engineer, was almost
contemporaneous with Botticelli, being born not much more than a hundred years after the death of Giotto.
With him art reached a level which it has never surpassed, old traditions and old canons were revived, and in
every direction culture proceeded again to those heights from which it had fallen.
The reader will not need to be reminded that this great renaissance was the direct result of the study of the
remains of the ancient arts of Greece and Rome. Botticelli and his contemporaries were, in a sense,
archæologists, for their work was inspired by the relics of ancient days.
Now, though at first sight it seems incredible that such an age of barbarism as that of the later Byzantine
period should return, it is indeed quite possible that a relatively uncultured age should come upon us in the
future; and there is every likelihood of certain communities passing over to the ranks of the absolute
Philistines. Socialism run mad would have no more time to give to the intellect than it had during the French
Revolution. Any form of violent social upheaval means catalepsy of the arts and crafts, and a trampling under
foot of old traditions. The invasions and revolts which are met with at the close of ancient Egyptian history
brought the culture of that country to the lowest ebb of vitality. The fall of Greece put an absolute stop to the
artistic life of that nation. The invasions of Italy by the inhabitants of less refined countries caused a set-back
in civilisation for which almost the whole of Europe suffered. Certain of the French arts and crafts have never
CHAPTER I. 8
recovered from the effects of the Revolution.
A national convulsion of one kind or another is to be expected by every country; and history tells us that such
a convulsion is generally followed by an age of industrial and artistic coma, which is brought to an end not so
much by the introduction of foreign ideas as by a renascence of the early traditions of the nation. It thus
behoves every man to interest himself in the continuity of these traditions, and to see that they are so
impressed upon the mind that they shall survive all upheavals, or with ease be re-established.
There is no better tonic for a people who have weakened, and whose arts, crafts, and industries have
deteriorated than a return to the conditions which obtained at a past age of national prosperity; and there are
few more repaying tasks in the long-run than that of reviving an interest in the best periods of artistic or
industrial activity. This can only be effected by the study of the past, that is to say by archæology.
It is to be remembered, of course, that the sentimental interest in antique objects which, in recent years, has
given a huge value to all ancient things, regardless of their intrinsic worth, is a dangerous attitude, unless it is
backed by the most expert knowledge; for instead of directing the attention only to the best work of the best
periods, it results in the diminishing of the output of modern original work and the setting of little of worth in
its place. A person of a certain fashionable set will now boast that there is no object in his room less than two
hundred years old: his only boast, however, should be that the room contains nothing which is not of intrinsic
beauty, interest, or good workmanship. The old chairs from the kitchen are dragged into the
drawing-room--because they are old; miniatures unmeritoriously painted by unknown artists for obscure
clients are nailed in conspicuous places--because they are old; hideous plates and dishes, originally made by
ignorant workmen for impoverished peasants, are enclosed in glass cases--because they are old; iron-bound
chests, which had been cheaply made to suit the purses of farmers, are rescued from the cottages of their
descendants and sold for fabulous sums--because they are old.
A person who fills a drawing-room with chairs, tables, and ornaments, dating from the reign of Queen Anne,
cannot say that he does so because he wishes it to look like a room of that date; for if this were his desire, he
would have to furnish it with objects which appeared to be newly made, since in the days of Queen Anne the
first quality noticeable in them would have been their newness. In fact, to produce the desired effect
everything in the room, with very few exceptions, would have to be a replica. To sit in this room full of
antiques in a frock-coat would be as bad a breach of good taste as the placing of a Victorian chandelier in an
Elizabethan banqueting-hall. To furnish the room with genuine antiquities because they are old and therefore
interesting would be to carry the museum spirit into daily life with its attending responsibilities, and would
involve all manner of incongruities and inconsistencies; while to furnish in this manner because antiques were
valuable would be merely vulgar. There are, thus, only three justifications that I can see for the action of the
man who surrounds himself with antiquities: he must do so because they are examples of workmanship,
because they are beautiful, or because they are endeared to him by family usage. These, of course, are full and
complete justifications; and the value of his attitude should be felt in the impetus which it gives to
conscientious modern work. There are periods in history at which certain arts, crafts, or industries reached an
extremely high level of excellence; and nothing can be more valuable to modern workmen than familiarity
with these periods. Well-made replicas have a value that is overlooked only by the inartistic. Nor must it be
forgotten that modern objects of modern design will one day become antiquities; and it should be our desire to
assist in the making of the period of our lifetime an age to which future generations will look back for
guidance and teaching. Every man can, in this manner, be of use to a nation, if only by learning to reject poor
work wherever he comes upon it--work which he feels would not stand against the criticism of Time; and thus
it may be said that archæology, which directs him to the best works of the ancients, and sets him a standard
and criterion, should be an essential part of his education.
[Illustration: PL. II Wood and enamel jewel-case discovered in the tomb of Yuaa and Tuau. An example of
the furniture of one of the best periods of ancient Egyptian art. --CAIRO MUSEUM.]
CHAPTER I. 9
[_Photo by E. Brugsch Pasha._
The third argument which I wish to employ here to demonstrate the value of the study of archæology and
history to the layman is based upon the assumption that patriotism is a desirable ingredient in a man's
character. This is a premise which assuredly will be admitted. True patriotism is essential to the maintenance
of a nation. It has taken the place, among certain people, of loyalty to the sovereign; for the armies which used
to go to war out of a blind loyalty to their king, now do so from a sense of patriotism which is shared by the
monarch (if they happen to have the good fortune to possess one).
Patriotism is often believed to consist of a love of one's country, in an affection for the familiar villages or
cities, fields or streets, of one's own dwelling-place. This is a grievous error. Patriotism should be an
unqualified desire for the welfare of the race as a whole. It is not really patriotic for the Englishman to say, "I
love England": it is only natural. It is not patriotic for him to say, "I don't think much of foreigners": it is only
a form of narrowness of mind which, in the case of England and certain other countries, happens sometimes to
be rather a useful attitude, but in the case of several nations, of which a good example is Egypt, would be
detrimental to their own interests. It was not unqualified patriotism that induced the Greeks to throw off the
Ottoman yoke: it was largely dislike of the Turks. It is not patriotism, that is to say undiluted concern for the
nation as a whole, which leads some of the modern Egyptians to prefer an entirely native government to the
Anglo-Egyptian administration now obtaining in that country: it is restlessness; and I am fortunately able to
define it thus without the necessity of entering the arena of polemics by an opinion as to whether that
restlessness is justified or not justified.
If patriotism were but the love of one's tribe and one's dwelling-place, then such undeveloped or fallen races
as, for example, the American Indians, could lay their downfall at the door of that sentiment; since the
exclusive love of the tribe prevented the small bodies from amalgamating into one great nation for the
opposing of the invader. If patriotism were but the desire for government without interference, then the
breaking up of the world's empires would be urged, and such federations as the United States of America
would be intolerable.
Patriotism is, and must be, the desire for the progress and welfare of the whole nation, without any regard
whatsoever to the conditions under which that progress takes place, and without any prejudice in favour either
of self-government or of outside control. I have no hesitation in saying that the patriotic Pole is he who is in
favour of Russian or German control of his country's affairs; for history has told him quite plainly that he
cannot manage them himself. The Nationalist in any country runs the risk of being the poorest patriot in the
land, for his continuous cry is for self-government, without any regard to the question as to whether such
government will be beneficial to his nation in the long-run.
The value of history to patriotism, then, is to be assessed under two headings. In the first place, history defines
the attitude which the patriot should assume. It tells him, in the clear light of experience, what is, and what is
not, good for his nation, and indicates to him how much he may claim for his country. And in the second
place, it gives to the patriots of those nations which have shown capacity and ability in the past a confidence
in the present; it permits in them the indulgence of that enthusiasm which will carry them, sure-footed, along
the path of glory.
Archæology, as the discovery and classification of the facts of history, is the means by which we may obtain a
true knowledge of what has happened in the past. It is the instrument with which we may dissect legend, and
extract from myth its ingredients of fact. Cold history tells the Greek patriot, eager to enter the fray, that he
must set little store by the precedent of the deeds of the Trojan war. It tells the English patriot that the "one
jolly Englishman" of the old rhyme is not the easy vanquisher of the "two froggy Frenchmen and one
Portugee" which tradition would have him believe. He is thus enabled to steer a middle course between arrant
conceit and childish fright. History tells him the actual facts: history is to the patriot what "form" is to the
racing man.
CHAPTER I. 10
In the case of the English (Heaven be praised!) history opens up a boundless vista for the patriotic. The
Englishman seldom realises how much he has to be proud of in his history, or how loudly the past cries upon
him to be of good cheer. One hears much nowadays of England's peril, and it is good that the red signals of
danger should sometimes be displayed. But let every Englishman remember that history can tell him of
greater perils faced successfully; of mighty armies commanded by the greatest generals the world has ever
known, held in check year after year, and finally crushed by England; of vast fleets scattered or destroyed by
English sailors; of almost impregnable cities captured by British troops. "There is something very
characteristic," writes Professor Seeley,[1] "in the indifference which we show towards the mighty
phenomenon of the diffusion of our race and the expansion of our state. We seem, as it were, to have
conquered and peopled half the world in a fit of absence of mind."
[Footnote 1: 'The Expansion of England,' p. 10.]
The history of England, and later of the British Empire, constitutes a tale so amazing that he who has the
welfare of the nation as a whole at heart--that is to say, the true patriot--is justified in entertaining the most
optimistic thoughts for the future. He should not be indifferent to the past: he should bear it in mind all the
time. Patriotism may not often be otherwise than misguided if no study of history has been made. The patriot
of one nation will wish to procure for his country a freedom which history would show him to have been its
very curse; and the patriot of another nation will encourage a nervousness and restraint in his people which
history would tell him was unnecessary. The English patriot has a history to read which, at the present time, it
is especially needful for him to consider; and, since Egyptology is my particular province, I cannot better
close this argument than by reminding the modern Egyptians that their own history of four thousand years and
its teaching must be considered by them when they speak of patriotism. A nation so talented as the
descendants of the Pharaohs, so industrious, so smart and clever, should give a far larger part of its attention to
the arts, crafts, and industries, of which Egyptian archæology has to tell so splendid a story.
As a final argument for the value of the study of history and archæology an aspect of the question may be
placed before the reader which will perhaps be regarded as fanciful, but which, in all sincerity, I believe to be
sober sense.
In this life of ours which, under modern conditions, is lived at so great a speed, there is a growing need for a
periodical pause wherein the mind may adjust the relationship of the things that have been to those that are. So
rapidly are our impressions received and assimilated, so individually are they shaped or classified, that, in
whatever direction our brains lead us, we are speedily carried beyond that province of thought which is
common to us all. A man who lives alone finds himself, in a few months, out of touch with the thought of his
contemporaries; and, similarly, a man who lives in what is called an up-to-date manner soon finds himself
grown unsympathetic to the sober movement of the world's slow round-about.
Now, the man who lives alone presently developes some of the recognised eccentricities of the recluse, which,
on his return to society, cause him to be regarded as a maniac; and the man who lives entirely in the present
cannot argue that the characteristics which he has developed are less maniacal because they are shared by his
associates. Rapidly he, too, has become eccentric; and just as the solitary man must needs come into the
company of his fellows if he would retain a healthy mind, so the man who lives in the present must allow
himself occasional intercourse with the past if he would keep his balance.
[Illustration: PL. III. Heavy gold earrings of Queen Tausert of Dynasty XX. An example of the work of
ancient Egyptian goldsmiths. --CAIRO MUSEUM.]
[_Photo by E. Brugsch Pasha._
Heraclitus, in a quotation preserved by Sextus Empiricus,[1] writes: "It behoves us to follow the common
reason of the world; yet, though there is a common reason in the world, the majority live as though they
CHAPTER I. 11
possessed a wisdom peculiar each unto himself alone." Every one of us who considers his mentality an
important part of his constitution should endeavour to give himself ample opportunities of adjusting his mind
to this "common reason" which is the silver thread that runs unbroken throughout history. We should
remember the yesterdays, that we may know what the pother of to-day is about; and we should foretell
to-morrow not by to-day but by every day that has been.
[Footnote 1: Bywater: 'Heracliti Ephesii Reliquiæ,' p. 38.]
Forgetfulness is so common a human failing. In our rapid transit through life we are so inclined to forget the
past stages of the journey. All things pass by and are swallowed up in a moment of time. Experiences crowd
upon us; the events of our life occur, are recorded by our busy brains, are digested, and are forgotten before
the substance of which they were made has resolved into its elements. We race through the years, and our
progress is headlong through the days.
Everything, as it is done with, is swept up into the basket of the past, and the busy handmaids, unless we
check them, toss the contents, good and bad, on to the great rubbish heap of the world's waste. Loves, hates,
gains, losses, all things upon which we do not lay fierce and strong hands, are gathered into nothingness, and,
with a few exceptions, are utterly forgotten.
And we, too, will soon have passed, and our little brains which have forgotten so much will be forgotten. We
shall be throttled out of the world and pressed by the clumsy hands of Death into the mould of that same
rubbish-hill of oblivion, unless there be a stronger hand to save us. We shall be cast aside, and left behind by
the hurrying crowd, unless there be those who will see to it that our soul, like that of John Brown, goes
marching along. There is only one human force stronger than death, and that force is History, By it the dead
are made to live again: history is the salvation of the mortal man as religion is the salvation of his immortal
life.
Sometimes, then, in our race from day to day it is necessary to stop the headlong progress of experience, and,
for an hour, to look back upon the past. Often, before we remember to direct our mind to it, that past is already
blurred, and dim. The picture is out of focus, and turning from it in sorrow instantly the flight of our time
begins again. This should not be. "There is," says Emerson, "a relationship between the hours of our life and
the centuries of time." Let us give history and archæology its due attention; for thus not only shall we be
rendering a service to all the dead, not only shall we be giving a reason and a usefulness to their lives, but we
shall also lend to our own thought a balance which in no otherwise can be obtained, we shall adjust ourselves
to the true movement of the world, and, above all, we shall learn how best to serve that nation to which it is
our inestimable privilege to belong.
CHAPTER II.
THE EGYPTIAN EMPIRE.
"History," says Sir J. Seeley, "lies before science as a mass of materials out of which a political doctrine can
be deduced.... Politics are vulgar when they are not liberalised by history, and history fades into mere
literature when it loses sight of its relation to practical politics.... Politics and history are only different aspects
of the same study."[1]
[Footnote 1: 'The Expansion of England.']
These words, spoken by a great historian, form the keynote of a book which has run into nearly twenty
editions; and they may therefore be regarded as having some weight. Yet what historian of old Egyptian
affairs concerns himself with the present welfare and future prospects of the country, or how many statesmen
CHAPTER II. 12
in Egypt give close attention to a study of the past? To the former the Egypt of modern times offers no scope
for his erudition, and gives him no opportunity of making "discoveries," which is all he cares about. To the
latter, Egyptology appears to be but a pleasant amusement, the main value of which is the finding of pretty
scarabs suitable for the necklaces of one's lady friends. Neither the one nor the other would for a moment
admit that Egyptology and Egyptian politics "are only different aspects of the same study." And yet there can
be no doubt that they are.
It will be argued that the historian of ancient Egypt deals with a period so extremely remote that it can have no
bearing upon the conditions of modern times, when the inhabitants of Egypt have altered their language,
religion, and customs, and the Mediterranean has ceased to be the active centre of the civilised world. But it is
to be remembered that the study of Egyptology carries one down to the Muhammedan invasion without much
straining of the term, and merges then into the study of the Arabic period at so many points that no real
termination can be given to the science; while the fact of the remoteness of its beginnings but serves to give it
a greater value, since the vista before the eyes is wider.
It is my object in this chapter to show that the ancient history of Egypt has a real bearing on certain aspects of
the polemics of the country. I need not again touch upon the matters which were referred to on page 8 in order
to demonstrate this fact. I will take but one subject--namely, that of Egypt's foreign relations and her wars in
other lands. It will be best, for this purpose, to show first of all that the ancient and modern Egyptians are one
and the same people; and, secondly, that the political conditions, broadly speaking, are much the same now as
they have been throughout history.
Professor Elliot Smith, F.R.S., has shown clearly enough, from the study of bones of all ages, that the ancient
and modern inhabitants of the Nile Valley are precisely the same people anthropologically; and this fact at
once sets the matter upon an unique footing: for, with the possible exception of China, there is no nation in the
world which can be proved thus to have retained its type for so long a period. This one fact makes any parallel
with Greece or Rome impossible. The modern Greeks have not much in common, anthropologically, with the
ancient Greeks, for the blood has become very mixed; the Italians are not the same as the old Romans; the
English are the result of a comparatively recent conglomeration of types. But in Egypt the subjects of archaic
Pharaohs, it seems certain, were exactly similar to those of the modern Khedives, and new blood has never
been introduced into the nation to an appreciable extent, not even by the Arabs. Thus, if there is any
importance in the bearing of history upon politics, we have in Egypt a better chance of appreciating it than we
have in the case of any other country.
It is true that the language has altered, but this is not a matter of first-rate importance. A Jew is not less typical
because he speaks German, French, or English; and the cracking of skulls in Ireland is introduced as easily in
English as it was in Erse. The old language of the Egyptian hieroglyphs actually is not yet quite dead; for, in
its Coptic form, it is still spoken by many Christian Egyptians, who will salute their friends in that tongue, or
bid them good-morning or good-night. Ancient Egyptian in this form is read in the Coptic churches; and God
is called upon by that same name which was given to Amon and his colleagues. Many old Egyptian words
have crept into the Arabic language, and are now in common use in the country; while often the old words are
confused with Arabic words of similar sound. Thus, at Abydos, the archaic fortress is now called the Shunet
es Zebib, which in Arabic would have the inexplicable meaning "the store-house of raisins"; but in the old
Egyptian language its name, of similar sound, meant "the fortress of the Ibis-jars," several of these sacred
birds having been buried there in jars, after the place had been disused as a military stronghold. A large
number of Egyptian towns still bear their hieroglyphical names: Aswan, (Kom) Ombo, Edfu, Esneh, Keft,
Kus, Keneh, Dendereh, for example. The real origin of these being now forgotten, some of them have been
given false Arabic derivations, and stories have been invented to account for the peculiar significance of the
words thus introduced. The word Silsileh in Arabic means "a chain," and a place in Upper Egypt which bears
that name is now said to be so called because a certain king here stretched a chain across the river to interrupt
the shipping; but in reality the name is derived from a mispronounced hieroglyphical word meaning "a
boundary." Similarly the town of Damanhur in Lower Egypt is said to be the place at which a great massacre
CHAPTER II. 13
took place, for in Arabic the name may be interpreted as meaning "rivers of blood," whereas actually the name
in Ancient Egyptian means simply "the Town of Horus." The archæological traveller in Egypt meets with
instances of the continued use of the language of the Pharaohs at every turn; and there are few things that
make the science of Egyptology more alive, or remove it further from the dusty atmosphere of the museum,
than this hearing of the old words actually spoken by the modern inhabitants of the land.
The religion of Ancient Egypt, like those of Greece and Rome, was killed by Christianity, which largely gave
place, at a later date, to Muhammedanism; and yet, in the hearts of the people there are still an extraordinary
number of the old pagan beliefs. I will mention a few instances, taking them at random from my memory.
In, ancient days the ithiphallic god Min was the patron of the crops, who watched over the growth of the
grain. In modern times a degenerate figure of this god Min, made of whitewashed wood and mud, may be
seen standing, like a scarecrow, in the fields throughout Egypt. When the sailors cross the Nile they may often
be heard singing _Ya Amuni, Ya Amuni_, "O Amon, O Amon," as though calling upon that forgotten god for
assistance. At Aswan those who are about to travel far still go up to pray at the site of the travellers' shrine,
which was dedicated to the gods of the cataracts. At Thebes the women climb a certain hill to make their
supplications at the now lost sanctuary of Meretsegert, the serpent-goddess of olden times. A snake, the relic
of the household goddess, is often kept as a kind of pet in the houses of the peasants. Barren women still go to
the ruined temples of the forsaken gods in the hope that there is virtue in the stones; and I myself have given
permission to disappointed husbands to take their childless wives to these places, where they have kissed the
stones and embraced the figures of the gods. The hair of the jackal is burnt in the presence of dying people,
even of the upper classes, unknowingly to avert the jackal-god Anubis, the Lord of Death. A scarab
representing the god of creation is sometimes placed in the bath of a young married woman to give virtue to
the water. A decoration in white paint over the doorways of certain houses in the south is a relic of the
religious custom of placing a bucranium there to avert evil. Certain temple-watchmen still call upon the spirits
resident in the sanctuaries to depart before they will enter the building. At Karnak a statue of the goddess
Sekhmet is regarded with holy awe; and the goddess who once was said to have massacred mankind is even
now thought to delight in slaughter. The golden barque of Amon-Ra, which once floated upon the sacred lake
of Karnak, is said to be seen sometimes by the natives at the present time, who have not yet forgotten its
former existence. In the processional festival of Abu'l Haggag, the patron saint of Luxor, whose mosque and
tomb stand upon the ruins of the Temple of Amon, a boat is dragged over the ground in unwitting
remembrance of the dragging of the boat of Amon in the processions of that god. Similarly in the Mouled el
Nebi procession at Luxor, boats placed upon carts are drawn through the streets, just as one may see them in
the ancient paintings and reliefs. The patron gods of Kom Ombo, Horur and Sebek, yet remain in the
memories of the peasants of the neighbourhood as the two brothers who lived in the temple in the days of old.
A robber entering a tomb will smash the eyes of the figures of the gods and deceased persons represented
therein, that they may not observe his actions, just as did his ancestors four thousand years ago. At Gurneh a
farmer recently broke the arms of an ancient statue, which lay half-buried near his fields, because he believed
that they had damaged his crops. In the south of Egypt a pot of water is placed upon the graves of the dead,
that their ghost, or ka, as it would have been called in old times, may not suffer from thirst; and the living will
sometimes call upon the name of the dead, standing at night in the cemeteries.
The ancient magic of Egypt is still widely practised, and many of the formulæ used in modern times are
familiar to the Egyptologist. The Egyptian, indeed, lives in a world much influenced by magic and thickly
populated by spirits, demons, and djins. Educated men holding Government appointments, and dressing in the
smartest European manner, will describe their miraculous adventures and their meetings with djins. An
Egyptian gentleman holding an important administrative post, told me the other day how his cousin was wont
to change himself into a cat at night time, and to prowl about the town. When a boy, his father noticed this
peculiarity, and on one occasion chased and beat the cat, with the result that the boy's body next morning was
found to be covered with stripes and bruises. The uncle of my informant once read such strong language
(magically) in a certain book that it began to tremble violently, and finally made a dash for it out of the
window. This same personage was once sitting beneath a palm-tree with a certain magician (who, I fear, was
CHAPTER II. 14
also a conjurer), when, happening to remark on the clusters of dates twenty feet or so above his head, his
friend stretched his arms upwards and his hands were immediately filled with the fruit. At another time this
magician left his overcoat by mistake in a railway carriage, and only remembered it when the train was a mere
speck upon the horizon; but, on the utterance of certain words, the coat immediately flew through the air back
to him.
I mention these particular instances because they were told to me by educated persons; but amongst the
peasants even more incredible stories are gravely accepted. The Omdeh, or headman, of the village of
Chaghb, not far from Luxor, submitted an official complaint to the police a short time ago against an afrit or
devil which was doing much mischief to him and his neighbours, snatching up oil-lamps and pouring the oil
over the terrified villagers, throwing stones at passers-by, and so forth. Spirits of the dead in like manner
haunt the living, and often do them mischief. At Luxor, lately, the ghost of a well-known robber persecuted
his widow to such an extent that she finally went mad. A remarkable parallel to this case, dating from
Pharaonic days, may be mentioned. It is the letter of a haunted widower to his dead wife, in which he asks her
why she persecutes him, since he was always kind to her during her life, nursed her through illnesses, and
never grieved her heart.[1]
[Footnote 1: Maspero: 'Études egyptologiques,' i. 145.]
These instances might be multiplied, but those which I have quoted will serve to show that the old gods are
still alive, and that the famous magic of the Egyptians is not yet a thing of the past. Let us now turn to the
affairs of everyday life.
An archæological traveller in Egypt cannot fail to observe the similarity between old and modern customs as
he rides through the villages and across the fields. The houses, when not built upon the European plan, are
surprisingly like those of ancient days. The old cornice still survives, and the rows of dried palm stems, from
which its form was originally derived, are still to be seen on the walls of gardens and courtyards. The huts or
shelters of dried corn-stalks, so often erected in the fields, are precisely the same as those used in prehistoric
days; and the archaic bunches of corn-stalks smeared with mud, which gave their form to later stone columns,
are set up to this day, though their stone posterity are now in ruins. Looking through the doorway of one of
these ancient houses, the traveller, perhaps, sees a woman grinding corn or kneading bread in exactly the same
manner as her ancestress did in the days of the Pharaohs. Only the other day a native asked to be allowed to
purchase from us some of the ancient millstones lying in one of the Theban temples, in order to re-use them
on his farm. The traveller will notice, in some shady corner, the village barber shaving the heads and faces of
his patrons, just as he is seen in the Theban tomb-paintings of thousands of years ago; and the small boys who
scamper across the road will have just the same tufts of hair left for decoration on their shaven heads as had
the boys of ancient Thebes and Memphis. In another house, where a death has occurred, the mourning
women, waving the same blue cloth which was the token of mourning in ancient days, will toss their arms
about in gestures familiar to every student of ancient scenes. Presently the funeral will issue forth, and the
men will sing that solemn yet cheery tune which never fails to call to mind the far-famed _Maneros_--that
song which Herodotus describes as a plaintive funeral dirge, and which Plutarch asserts was suited at the same
time to festive occasions. In some other house a marriage will be taking place, and the singers and pipers will,
in like manner, recall the scenes upon the monuments. The former have a favourite gesture--the placing of the
hand behind the ear as they sing--which is frequently shown in ancient representations of such festive scenes.
The dancing girls, too, are here to be seen, their eyes and cheeks heavily painted, as were those of their
ancestresses; and in their hands are the same tambourines as are carried by their class in Pharaonic paintings
and reliefs. The same date-wine which intoxicated the worshippers of the Egyptian Bacchus goes the round of
this village company, and the same food stuff, the same small, flat loaves of bread, are eaten.
Passing out into the fields the traveller observes the ground raked into the small squares for irrigation which
the prehistoric farmer made; and the plough is shaped as it always was. The shadoof, or water-hoist, is
patiently worked as it has been for thousands of years; while the cylindrical hoist employed in Lower Egypt
CHAPTER II. 15
was invented and introduced in Ptolemaic times. Threshing and winnowing proceed in the manner represented
on the monuments, and the methods of sowing and reaping have not changed. Along the embanked roads,
men, cattle, and donkeys file past against the sky-line, recalling the straight rows of such figures depicted so
often upon the monuments. Overhead there flies the vulture goddess Nekheb, and the hawk Horus hovers near
by. Across the road ahead slinks the jackal, Anubis; under one's feet crawls Khepera, the scarab; and there,
under the sacred tree, sleeps the horned ram of Amon. In all directions the hieroglyphs of the ancient
Egyptians pass to and fro, as though some old temple-inscription had come to life. The letter m, the owl, goes
hooting past. The letter a, the eagle, circles overhead; the sign ur, the wagtail, flits at the roadside, chirping at
the sign rekh, the peewit. Along the road comes the sign ab, the frolicking calf; and near it is ka, the bull;
while behind them walks the sign fa, a man carrying a basket on his head. In all directions are the figures from
which the ancients made their hieroglyphical script; and thus that wonderful old writing at once ceases to be
mysterious, a thing of long ago, and one realises how natural a product of the country it was.
[Illustration: PL. IV. In the palm-groves near Sakkâra, Egypt.]
[_Photo by E. Bird._
In a word, ancient and modern Egyptians are fundamentally similar. Nor is there any great difference to be
observed between the country's relations with foreign powers in ancient days and those of the last hundred
years. As has been seen in the last chapter, Egypt was usually occupied by a foreign power, or ruled by a
foreign dynasty, just as at the present day; and a foreign army was retained in the country during most of the
later periods of ancient history. There were always numerous foreigners settled in Egypt, and in Ptolemaic and
Roman times Alexandria and Memphis swarmed with them. The great powers of the civilised world were
always watching Egypt as they do now, not always in a friendly attitude to that one of themselves which
occupied the country; and the chief power with which Egypt was concerned in the time of the Ramesside
Pharaohs inhabited Asia Minor and perhaps Turkey, just as in the middle ages and the last century. Then, as in
modern times, Egypt had much of her attention held by the Sudan, and constant expeditions had to be made
into the regions above the cataracts. Thus it cannot be argued that ancient history offers no precedent for
modern affairs because all things have now changed. Things have changed extremely little, broadly speaking;
and general lines of conduct have the same significance at the present time as they had in the past.
I wish now to give an outline of Egypt's relationship to her most important neighbour, Syria, in order that the
bearing of history upon modern political matters may be demonstrated; for it would seem that the records of
the past make clear a tendency which is now somewhat overlooked. I employ this subject simply as an
example.
From the earliest historical times the Egyptians have endeavoured to hold Syria and Palestine as a vassal state.
One of the first Pharaohs with whom we meet in Egyptian history, King Zeser of Dynasty III., is known to
have sent a fleet to the Lebanon in order to procure cedar wood, and there is some evidence to show that he
held sway over this country. For how many centuries previous to his reign the Pharaohs had overrun Syria we
cannot now say, but there is no reason to suppose that Zeser initiated the aggressive policy of Egypt in Asia.
Sahura, a Pharaoh of Dynasty V., attacked the Phoenician coast with his fleet, and returned to the Nile Valley
with a number of Syrian captives. Pepi I. of the succeeding dynasty also attacked the coast-cities, and Pepi II.
had considerable intercourse with Asia. Amenemhat I., of Dynasty XII., fought in Syria, and appears to have
brought it once more under Egyptian sway. Senusert I. seems to have controlled the country to some extent,
for Egyptians lived there in some numbers. Senusert III. won a great victory over the Asiatics in Syria; and a
stela and statue belonging to Egyptian officials have been found at Gezer, between Jerusalem and the sea.
After each of the above-mentioned wars it is to be presumed that the Egyptians held Syria for some years,
though little is now known of the events of these far-off times.
During the Hyksos dynasties in Egypt there lived a Pharaoh named Khyan who was of Semitic extraction; and
there is some reason to suppose that he ruled from Baghdad to the Sudan, he and his fathers having created a
CHAPTER II. 16
great Egyptian Empire by the aid of foreign troops. Egypt's connection with Asia during the Hyksos rule is not
clearly defined, but the very fact that these foreign kings were anxious to call themselves "Pharaohs" shows
that Egypt dominated in the east end of the Mediterranean. The Hyksos kings of Egypt very probably held
Syria in fee, being possessed of both countries, but preferring to hold their court in Egypt.
We now come to the great Dynasty XVIII., and we learn more fully of the Egyptian invasions of Syria.
Ahmosis I. drove the Hyksos out of the Delta and pursued them through Judah. His successor, Amenhotep I.,
appears to have seized all the country as far as the Euphrates; and Thutmosis I., his son, was able to boast that
he ruled even unto that river. Thutmosis III., Egypt's greatest Pharaoh, led invasion after invasion into Syria,
so that his name for generations was a terror to the inhabitants. From the Euphrates to the fourth cataract of
the Nile the countries acknowledged him king, and the mighty Egyptian fleet patrolled the seas. This Pharaoh
fought no less than seventeen campaigns in Asia, and he left to his son the most powerful throne in the world.
Amenhotep II. maintained this empire and quelled the revolts of the Asiatics with a strong hand. Thutmosis
IV., his son, conducted two expeditions into Syria; and the next king, Amenhotep III., was acknowledged
throughout that country.
That extraordinary dreamer, Akhnaton, the succeeding Pharaoh, allowed the empire to pass from him owing
to his religious objections to war; but, after his death, Tutankhamen once more led the Egyptian armies into
Asia. Horemheb also made a bid for Syria; and Seti I. recovered Palestine. Rameses II., his son, penetrated to
North Syria; but, having come into contact with the new power of the Hittites, he was unable to hold the
country. The new Pharaoh, Merenptah, seized Canaan and laid waste the land of Israel. A few years later,
Rameses III. led his fleet and his army to the Syrian coast and defeated the Asiatics in a great sea-battle. He
failed to hold the country, however, and after his death Egypt remained impotent for two centuries. Then,
under Sheshonk I., of Dynasty XXII., a new attempt was made, and Jerusalem was captured. Takeloth II., of
the same dynasty, sent thither an Egyptian army to help in the overthrow of Shalmaneser II.
From this time onwards the power of Egypt had so much declined that the invasions into Syria of necessity
became more rare. Shabaka of Dynasty XXV. concerned himself deeply with Asiatic politics, and attempted
to bring about a state of affairs which would have given him the opportunity of seizing the country. Pharaoh
Necho, of the succeeding dynasty, invaded Palestine and advanced towards the Euphrates. He recovered for
Egypt her Syrian province, but it was speedily lost again. Apries, a few years later, captured the Phoenician
coast and invaded Palestine; but the country did not remain for long under Egyptian rule. It is not necessary to
record all the Syrian wars of the Dynasty of the Ptolemies. Egypt and Asia were now closely connected, and
at several periods during this phase of Egyptian history the Asiatic province came under the control of the
Pharaohs. The wars of Ptolemy I. in Syria were conducted on a large scale. In the reign of Ptolemy III. there
were three campaigns, and I cannot refrain from quoting a contemporary record of the King's powers if only
for the splendour of its wording:--
"The great King Ptolemy ... having inherited from his father the royalty of Egypt and Libya and Syria and
Phoenicia and Cyprus and Lycia and Caria and the Cyclades, set out on a campaign into Asia with infantry
and cavalry forces, a naval armament and elephants, both Troglodyte and Ethiopic.... But having become
master of all the country within the Euphrates, and of Cilicia and Pamphylia and Ionia and the Hellespont and
Thrace, and of all the military forces and elephants in these countries, and having made the monarchs in all
these places his subjects, he crossed the Euphrates, and having brought under him Mesopotamia and
Babylonia and Susiana and Persis and Media, and all the rest as far as Bactriana ... he sent forces through the
canals----" (Here the text breaks off.)
Later in this dynasty Ptolemy VII. was crowned King of Syria, but the kingdom did not remain long in his
power. Then came the Romans, and for many years Syria and Egypt were sister provinces of one empire.
There is no necessity to record the close connection between the two countries in Arabic times. For a large
part of that era Egypt and Syria formed part of the same empire; and we constantly find Egyptians fighting in
CHAPTER II. 17
Asia. Now, under Edh Dhahir Bebars of the Baharide Mameluke Dynasty, we see them helping to subject
Syria and Armenia; now, under El-Mansur Kalaun, Damascus is captured; and now En Nasir Muhammed is
found reigning from Tunis to Baghdad. In the Circassian Mameluke Dynasty we see El Muayyad crushing a
revolt in Syria, and El Ashraf Bursbey capturing King John of Cyprus and keeping his hand on Syria. And so
the tale continues, until, as a final picture, we see Ibrahim Pasha leading the Egyptians into Asia and crushing
the Turks at Iconium.
Such is the long list of the wars waged by Egypt in Syria. Are we to suppose that these continuous incursions
into Asia have suddenly come to an end? Are we to imagine that because there has been a respite for a
hundred years the precedent of six thousand years has now to be disregarded? By the recent reconquest of the
Sudan it has been shown that the old political necessities still exist for Egypt in the south, impelling her to be
mistress of the upper reaches of the Nile. Is there now no longer any chance of her expanding in other
directions should her hands become free?
The reader may answer with the argument that in early days England made invasion after invasion into
France, yet ceased after a while to do so. But this is no parallel. England was impelled to war with France
because the English monarchs believed themselves to be, by inheritance, kings of a large part of France; and
when they ceased to believe this they ceased to make war. The Pharaohs of Egypt never considered
themselves to be kings of Syria, and never used any title suggesting an inherited sovereignty. They merely
held Syria as a buffer state, and claimed no more than an overlordship there. Now Syria is still a buffer state,
and the root of the trouble, therefore, still exists. Though I must disclaim all knowledge of modern politics, I
am quite sure that it is no meaningless phrase to say that England will most carefully hold this tendency in
check prevent an incursion into Syria; but, with a strong controlling hand relaxed, it would require more than
human strength to eradicate an Egyptian tendency--nay, a habit, of six thousand years' standing. Try as she
might, Egypt, as far as an historian can see, would not be able to prevent herself passing ultimately into Syria
again. How or when this would take place an Egyptologist cannot see, for he is accustomed to deal in long
periods of time, and to consider the centuries as others might the decades. It might not come for a hundred
years or more: it might come suddenly quite by accident.
In 1907 there was a brief moment when Egypt appeared to be, quite unknowingly, on the verge of an
attempted reconquest of her lost province. There was a misunderstanding with Turkey regarding the
delineation of the Syrio-Sinaitic frontier; and, immediately, the Egyptian Government took strong action and
insisted that the question should be settled. Had there been bloodshed the seat of hostilities would have been
Syria; and supposing that Egypt had been victorious, she would have pushed the opposing forces over the
North Syrian frontier into Asia Minor, and when peace was declared she would have found herself dictating
terms from a point of vantage three hundred miles north of Jerusalem. Can it be supposed that she would then
have desired to abandon the reconquered territory?
However, matters were settled satisfactorily with the Porte, and the Egyptian Government, which had never
realised this trend of events, and had absolutely no designs upon Syria, gave no further consideration to
Asiatic affairs. In the eyes of the modern onlookers the whole matter had developed from a series of chances;
but in the view of the historian the moment of its occurrence was the only chance about it, the fact of its
occurrence being inevitable according to the time-proven rules of history. The phrase "England in Egypt" has
been given such prominence of late that a far more important phrase, "Egypt in Asia," has been overlooked.
Yet, whereas the former is a catch-word of barely thirty years' standing, the latter has been familiar at the east
end of the Mediterranean for forty momentous centuries at the lowest computation, and rings in the ears of the
Egyptologist all through the ages. I need thus no justification for recalling it in these pages.
Now let us glance at Egypt's north-western frontier. Behind the deserts which spread to the west of the Delta
lies the oasis of Siwa; and from here there is a continuous line of communication with Tripoli and Tunis.
Thus, during the present winter (1910-11), the outbreak of cholera at Tripoli has necessitated the despatch of
quarantine officials to the oasis in order to prevent the spread of the disease into Egypt. Now, of late years we
CHAPTER II. 18
have heard much talk regarding the Senussi fraternity, a Muhammedan sect which is said to be prepared to
declare a holy war and to descend upon Egypt. In 1909 the Egyptian Mamur of Siwa was murdered, and it
was freely stated that this act of violence was the beginning of the trouble. I have no idea as to the real extent
of the danger, nor do I know whether this bogie of the west, which is beginning to cause such anxiety in Egypt
in certain classes, is but a creation of the imagination; but it will be interesting to notice the frequent
occurrence of hostilities in this direction, since the history of Egypt's gateways is surely a study meet for her
guardians.
When the curtain first rises upon archaic times, we find those far-off Pharaohs struggling with the Libyans
who had penetrated into the Delta from Tripoli and elsewhere. In early dynastic history they are the chief
enemies of the Egyptians, and great armies have to be levied to drive them back through Siwa to their homes.
Again in Dynasty XII., Amenemhat I. had to despatch his son to drive these people out of Egypt; and at the
beginning of Dynasty XVIII., Amenhotep I. was obliged once more to give them battle. Seti I. of Dynasty
XIX. made war upon them, and repulsed their invasion into Egypt. Rameses II. had to face an alliance of
Libyans, Lycians, and others, in the western Delta. His son Merenptah waged a most desperate war with them
in order to defend Egypt against their incursions, a war which has been described as the most perilous in
Egyptian history; and it was only after a battle in which nine thousand of the enemy were slain that the war
came to an end. Rameses III., however, was again confronted with these persistent invaders, and only
succeeded in checking them temporarily. Presently the tables were turned, and Dynasty XXII., which reigned
so gloriously in Egypt, was Libyan in origin. No attempt was made thenceforth for many years to check the
peaceful entrance of Libyans into Egypt, and soon that nation held a large part of the Delta. Occasional
mention is made of troubles upon the north-west frontier, but little more is heard of any serious invasions. In
Arabic times disturbances are not infrequent, and certain sovereigns, as for example, El Mansur Kalaun, were
obliged to invade the enemy's country, thus extending Egypt's power as far as Tunis.
There is one lesson which may be learnt from the above facts--namely, that this frontier is somewhat exposed,
and that incursions from North Africa by way of Siwa are historic possibilities. If the Senussi invasion of
Egypt is ever attempted it will not, at any rate, be without precedent.
When England entered Egypt in 1882 she found a nation without external interests, a country too
impoverished and weak to think of aught else but its own sad condition. The reviving of this much-bled,
anæmic people, and the reorganisation of the Government, occupied the whole attention of the
Anglo-Egyptian officials, and placed Egypt before their eyes in only this one aspect. Egypt appeared to be but
the Nile Valley and the Delta; and, in truth, that was, and still is, quite as much as the hard-worked officials
could well administer. The one task of the regeneration of Egypt was all absorbing, and the country came to
be regarded as a little land wherein a concise, clearly-defined, and compact problem could be worked out.
[Illustration: PL. V. The mummy of Sety I. of Dynasty XIX. --CAIRO MUSEUM.]
[_Photo by E. Brugsch Pasha._
Now, while this was most certainly the correct manner in which to face the question, and while Egypt has
benefited enormously by this singleness of purpose in her officials, it was, historically, a false attitude. Egypt
is not a little country: Egypt is a crippled Empire. Throughout her history she has been the powerful rival of
the people of Asia Minor. At one time she was mistress of the Sudan, Somaliland, Palestine, Syria, Libya, and
Cyprus; and the Sicilians, Sardinians, Cretans, and even Greeks, stood in fear of the Pharaoh. In Arabic times
she held Tunis and Tripoli, and even in the last century she was the foremost Power at the east end of the
Mediterranean. Napoleon when he came to Egypt realised this very thoroughly, and openly aimed to make her
once more a mighty empire. But in 1882 such fine dreams were not to be considered: there was too much
work to be done in the Nile Valley itself. The Egyptian Empire was forgotten, and Egypt was regarded as
permanently a little country. The conditions which we found here we took to be permanent conditions. They
were not. We arrived when the country was in a most unnatural state as regards its foreign relations; and we
CHAPTER II. 19
were obliged to regard that state as chronic. This, though wise, was absolutely incorrect. Egypt in the past
never has been for more than a short period a single country; and all history goes to show that she will not
always be single in the future.
With the temporary loss of the Syrian province Egypt's need for a navy ceased to exist; and the fact that she is
really a naval power has now passed from men's memory. Yet it was not much more than a century ago that
Muhammed Ali fought a great naval battle with the Turks, and utterly defeated them. In ancient history the
Egyptian navy was the terror of the Mediterranean, and her ships policed the east coast of Africa. In
prehistoric times the Nile boats were built, it would seem, upon a seafaring plan: a fact that has led some
scholars to suppose that the land was entered and colonised from across the waters. We talk of Englishmen as
being born to the sea, as having a natural and inherited tendency towards "business upon great waters"; and
yet the English navy dates from the days of Queen Elizabeth. It is true that the Plantagenet wars with France
checked what was perhaps already a nautical bias, and that had it not been for the Norman conquest, England,
perchance would have become a sea power at an earlier date. But at best the tendency is only a thousand years
old. In Egypt it is seven or eight thousand years old at the lowest computation. It makes one smile to think of
Egypt as a naval power. It is the business of the historian to refrain from smiling, and to remark only that,
absurd as it may sound, Egypt's future is largely upon the water as her past has been. It must be remembered
that she was fighting great battles in huge warships three or four hundred feet in length at a time when Britons
were paddling about in canoes.
One of the ships built by the Pharaoh Ptolemy Philopator was four hundred and twenty feet long, and had
several banks of oars. It was rowed by four thousand sailors, while four hundred others managed the sails.
Three thousand soldiers were also carried upon its decks. The royal dahabiyeh which this Pharaoh used upon
the Nile was three hundred and thirty feet long, and was fitted with state rooms and private rooms of
considerable size. Another vessel contained, besides the ordinary cabins, large bath-rooms, a library, and an
astronomical observatory. It had eight towers, in which there were machines capable of hurling stones
weighing three hundred pounds or more, and arrows eighteen feet in length. These huge vessels were built
some two centuries before Cæsar landed in Britain.[1]
[Footnote 1: Athenæus, v. 8.]
In conclusion, then, it must be repeated that the present Nile-centred policy in Egypt, though infinitely best for
the country at this juncture, is an artificial one, unnatural to the nation except as a passing phase; and what
may be called the Imperial policy is absolutely certain to take its place in time, although the Anglo-Egyptian
Government, so long as it exists, will do all in its power to check it. History tells us over and over again that
Syria is the natural dependant of Egypt, fought for or bargained for with the neighbouring countries to the
north; that the Sudan is likewise a natural vassal which from time to time revolts and has to be reconquered;
and that Egypt's most exposed frontier lies on the north-west. In conquering the Sudan at the end of the
nineteenth century the Egyptians were but fulfilling their destiny: it was a mere accident that their arms were
directed against a Mahdi. In discussing seriously the situation in the western oases, they are working upon the
precise rules laid down by history. And if their attention is not turned in the far future to Syria, they will be
defying rules even more precise, and, in the opinion of those who have the whole course of Egyptian history
spread before them, will but be kicking against the pricks. Here surely we have an example of the value of the
study of a nation's history, which is not more nor less than a study of its political tendencies.
Speaking of the relationship of history to politics, Sir J. Seeley wrote: "I tell you that when you study English
history, you study not the past of England only but her future. It is the welfare of your country, it is your
whole interest as citizens, that is in question when you study history." These words hold good when we deal
with Egyptian history, and it is our business to learn the political lessons which the Egyptologist can teach us,
rather than to listen to his dissertations upon scarabs and blue glaze. Like the astronomers of old, the
Egyptologist studies, as it were, the stars, and reads the future in them; but it is not the fashion for kings to
wait upon his pronouncements any more! Indeed he reckons in such very long periods of time, and makes
CHAPTER II. 20
startling statements about events which probably will not occur for very many years to come, that the
statesman, intent upon his task, has some reason to declare that the study of past ages does not assist him to
deal with urgent affairs. Nevertheless, in all seriousness, the Egyptologist's study is to be considered as but
another aspect of statecraft, and he fails in his labours if he does not make this his point of view.
In his arrogant manner the Egyptologist will remark that modern politics are of too fleeting a nature to interest
him. In answer, I would tell him that if he sits studying his papyri and his mummies without regard for the fact
that he is dealing with a nation still alive, still contributing its strength to spin the wheel of the world around,
then are his labours worthless and his brains misused. I would tell him that if his work is paid for, then is he a
robber if he gives no return in information which will be of practical service to Egypt in some way or another.
The Egyptian Government spends enormous sums each year upon the preservation of the magnificent relics of
bygone ages--relics for which, I regret to say, the Egyptians themselves care extremely little. Is this money
spent, then, to amuse the tourist in the land, or simply to fulfil obligations to ethical susceptibilities? No; there
is but one justification for this very necessary expenditure of public money--namely, that these relics are
regarded, so to speak, as the school-books of the nation, which range over a series of subjects from
pottery-making to politics, from stone-cutting to statecraft. The future of Egypt may be read upon the walls of
her ancient temples and tombs. Let the Egyptologist never forget, in the interest and excitement of his
discoveries, what is the real object of his work.
CHAPTER III.
THE NECESSITY OF ARCHÆOLOGY TO THE GAIETY OF THE WORLD.
When a great man puts a period to his existence upon earth by dying, he is carefully buried in a tomb, and a
monument is set up to his glory in the neighbouring church. He may then be said to begin his second life, his
life in the memory of the chronicler and historian. After the lapse of an æon or two the works of the historian,
and perchance the tomb itself, are rediscovered; and the great man begins his third life, now as a subject of
discussion and controversy amongst archæologists in the pages of a scientific journal. It may be supposed that
the spirit of the great man, not a little pleased with its second life, has an extreme distaste for his third. There
is a dead atmosphere about it which sets him yawning as only his grave yawned before. The charm has been
taken from his deeds; there is no longer any spring in them. He must feel towards the archæologist much as a
young man feels towards his cold-blooded parent by whom his love affair has just been found out. The public,
too, if by chance it comes upon this archæological journal, finds the discussion nothing more than a mental
gymnastic, which, as the reader drops off to sleep, gives him the impression that the writer is a man of
profound brain capacity, but, like the remains of the great man of olden times, as dry as dust.
There is one thing, however, which has been overlooked. This scientific journal does not contain the ultimate
results of the archæologist's researches. It contains the researches themselves. The public, so to speak, has
been listening to the pianist playing his morning scales, has been watching the artist mixing his colours, has
been examining the unshaped block of marble and the chisels in the sculptor's studio. It must be confessed, of
course, that the archæologist has so enjoyed his researches that often the ultimate result has been overlooked
by him. In the case of Egyptian archæology, for example, there are only two Egyptologists who have ever set
themselves to write a readable history,[1] whereas the number of books which record the facts of the science
is legion.
[Footnote 1: Professor J.H. Breasted and Sir Gaston Maspero.]
The archæologist not infrequently lives, for a large part of his time, in a museum, a somewhat dismal place.
He is surrounded by rotting tapestries, decaying bones, crumbling stones, and rusted or corroded objects. His
indoor work has paled his cheek, and his muscles are not like iron bands. He stands, often, in the contiguity to
an ancient broadsword most fitted to demonstrate the fact that he could never use it. He would probably be
CHAPTER III. 21
dismissed his curatorship were he to tell of any dreams which might run in his head--dreams of the time when
those tapestries hung upon the walls of barons' banquet-halls, or when those stones rose high above the streets
of Camelot.
Moreover, those who make researches independently must needs contribute their results to scientific journals,
written in the jargon of the learned. I came across a now forgotten journal, a short time ago, in which an
English gentleman, believing that he had made a discovery in the province of Egyptian hieroglyphs,
announced it in ancient Greek. There would be no supply of such pedantic swagger were there not a demand
for it.
Small wonder, then, that the archæologist is often represented as partaking somewhat of the quality of the dust
amidst which he works. It is not necessary here to discuss whether this estimate is just or not: I wish only to
point out its paradoxical nature.
More than any other science, archæology might be expected to supply its exponents with stuff that, like old
wine, would fire the blood and stimulate the senses. The stirring events of the Past must often be reconstructed
by the archæologist with such precision that his prejudices are aroused, and his sympathies are so enlisted as
to set him fighting with a will under this banner or under that. The noise of the hardy strife of young nations is
not yet silenced for him, nor have the flags and the pennants faded from sight. He has knowledge of the state
secrets of kings, and, all along the line, is an intimate spectator of the crowded pageant of history. The
caravan-masters of the elder days, the admirals of the "great green sea" the captains of archers, have related
their adventures to him; and he might repeat to you their stories. Indeed, he has such a tale to tell that, looking
at it in this light, one might expect his listeners all to be good fighting men and noble women. It might be
supposed that the archæologist would gather around him only men who have pleasure in the road that leads
over the hills, and women who have known the delight of the open. One has heard so often of the "brave days
of old" that the archæologist might well be expected to have his head stuffed with brave tales and little else.
His range, however, may be wider than this. To him, perhaps, it has been given to listen to the voice of the
ancient poet, heard as a far-off whisper; to breathe in forgotten gardens the perfume of long dead flowers; to
contemplate the love of women whose beauty is all perished in the dust; to hearken to the sound of the harp
and the sistra, to be the possessor of the riches of historical romance. Dim armies have battled around him for
the love of Helen; shadowy captains of sea-going ships have sung to him through the storm the song of the
sweethearts left behind them; he has feasted with sultans, and kings' goblets have been held to his lips; he has
watched Uriah the Hittite sent to the forefront of the battle.
Thus, were he to offer a story, one might now suppose that there would gather around him, not the men of
muscle, but a throng of sallow listeners, as improperly expectant as were those who hearkened under the
moon to the narrations of Boccaccio, or, in old Baghdad, gave ear to the tales of the thousand and one nights.
One might suppose that his audience would be drawn from those classes most fondly addicted to pleasure, or
most nearly representative, in their land and in their time, of the light-hearted and not unwanton races of
whom he had to tell. For his story might be expected to be one wherein wine and women and song found
countenance. Even were he to tell of ancient tragedies and old sorrows, he would still make his appeal, one
might suppose, to gallants and their mistresses, to sporting men and women of fashion, just as, in the
mournful song of Rosabelle, Sir Walter Scott is able to address himself to the "ladies gay," or Coleridge in his
sad "Ballad of the Dark Ladie" to "fair maids."
Who could better arrest the attention of the coxcomb than the archæologist who has knowledge of silks and
scents now lost to the living world? To the gourmet who could more appeal than the archæologist who has
made abundant acquaintance with the forgotten dishes of the East? Who could so surely thrill the senses of the
courtesan than the archæologist who can relate that which was whispered by Anthony in the ear of Cleopatra?
To the gambler who could be more enticing than the archæologist who has seen kings play at dice for their
kingdoms? The imaginative, truly, might well collect the most highly disreputable audience to listen to the
CHAPTER III. 22
tales of the archæologist.
But no, these are not the people who are anxious to catch the pearls which drop from his mouth. Do statesmen
and diplomatists, then, listen to him who can unravel for them the policies of the Past? Do business men
hasten from Threadneedle Street and Wall Street to sit at his feet, that they may have instilled into them a little
of the romance of ancient money? I fear not.
Come with me to some provincial town, where this day Professor Blank is to deliver one of his archæological
lectures at the Town Hall. We are met at the door by the secretary of the local archæological society: a
melancholy lady in green plush, who suffers from St Vitus's dance. Gloomily we enter the hall and silently
accept the seats which are indicated to us by an unfortunate gentleman with a club-foot. In front of us an
elderly female with short hair is chatting to a very plain young woman draped like a lay figure. On the right an
emaciated man with a very bad cough shuffles on his chair; on the left two old grey-beards grumble to one
another about the weather, a subject which leads up to the familiar "Mine catches me in the small of the
back"; while behind us the inevitable curate, of whose appearance it would be trite to speak, describes to an
astonished old lady the recent discovery of the pelvis of a mastodon.
The professor and the aged chairman step on to the platform; and, amidst the profoundest gloom, the latter
rises to pronounce the prefatory rigmarole. "Archæology," he says, in a voice of brass, "is a science which
bars its doors to all but the most erudite; for, to the layman who has not been vouchsafed the opportunity of
studying the dusty volumes of the learned, the bones of the dead will not reveal their secrets, nor will the
crumbling pediments of naos and cenotaph, the obliterated tombstones, or the worm-eaten parchments, tell us
their story. To-night, however, we are privileged; for Professor Blank will open the doors for us that we may
gaze for a moment upon that solemn charnel-house of the Past in which he has sat for so many long hours of
inductive meditation."
And the professor by his side, whose head, perhaps, was filled with the martial music of the long-lost hosts of
the Lord, or before whose eyes there swayed the entrancing forms of the dancing-girls of Babylon, stares
horrified from chairman to audience. He sees crabbed old men and barren old women before him, afflicted
youths and fatuous maidens; and he realises at once that the golden keys which he possesses to the gates of the
treasury of the jewelled Past will not open the doors of that charnel-house which they desire to be shown. The
scent of the king's roses fades from his nostrils, the Egyptian music which throbbed in his ears is hushed, the
glorious illumination of the Palace of a Thousand Columns is extinguished; and in the gathering gloom we
leave him fumbling with a rusty key at the mildewed door of the Place of Bones.
Why is it, one asks, that archæology is a thing so misunderstood? Can it be that both lecturer and audience
have crushed down that which was in reality uppermost in their minds: that a shy search for romance has led
these people to the Town Hall? Or perchance archæology has become to them something not unlike a vice,
and to listen to an archæological lecture is their remaining chance of being naughty. It may be that, having one
foot in the grave, they take pleasure in kicking the moss from the surrounding tombstones with the other; or
that, being denied, for one reason or another, the jovial society of the living, like Robert Southey's "Scholar"
their hopes are with the dead.
[Illustration: PL. VI. A relief upon the side of the sarcophagus of one of the wives of King Mentuhotep III.,
discovered at Dêr el Bahri (Thebes). The royal lady is taking sweet-smelling ointment from an alabaster vase.
A handmaiden keeps the flies away with a bird's-wing fan. --CAIRO MUSEUM.]
[_Photo by E. Brugsch Pasha._
Be the explanation what it may, the fact is indisputable that archæology is patronised by those who know not
its real meaning. A man has no more right to think of the people of old as dust and dead bones than he has to
think of his contemporaries as lumps of meat. The true archæologist does not take pleasure in skeletons as
skeletons, for his whole effort is to cover them decently with flesh and skin once more, and to put some
thoughts back into the empty skulls. He sets himself to hide again the things which he would not intentionally
lay bare. Nor does he delight in ruined buildings: rather he deplores that they are ruined. Coleridge wrote like
the true archæologist when he composed that most magical poem "Khubla Khan"--
"In Xanadu did Khubla Khan A stately pleasure-dome decree: Where Alph, the sacred river, ran Through
caverns measureless to man Down to a sunless sea."
And those who would have the pleasure-domes of the gorgeous Past reconstructed for them must turn to the
archæologist; those who would see the damsel with the dulcimer in the gardens of Xanadu must ask of him
the secret, and of none other. It is true that, before he can refashion the dome or the damsel, he will have to
grub his way through old refuse heaps till he shall lay bare the ruins of the walls and expose the bones of the
lady. But this is the "dirty work"; and the mistake which is made lies here: that this preliminary dirty work is
confused with the final clean result. An artist will sometimes build up his picture of Venus from a skeleton
bought from an old Jew round the corner; and the smooth white paper which he uses will have been made
from putrid rags and bones. Amongst painters themselves these facts are not hidden, but by the public they are
most carefully obscured. In the case of archæology, however, the tedious details of construction are so placed
in the foreground that the final picture is hardly noticed at all. As well might one go to Rheims to see men fly,
and be shown nothing else but screws and nuts, steel rods and cog-wheels. Originally the fault, perhaps, lay
with the archæologist; now it lies both with him and with the public. The public has learnt to ask to be shown
the works, and the archæologist is often so proud of them that he forgets to mention the purpose of the
machine.
A Roman statue of bronze, let us suppose, is discovered in the Thames valley. It is so corroded and eaten
away that only an expert could recognise that it represents a reclining goddess. In this condition it is placed in
It will be seen, then, that the business of archæology is often misunderstood both by archæologists and by the
public; and that there is really no reason to believe, with Thomas Earle, that the real antiquarian loves a thing
the better for that it is rotten and stinketh. That the impression has gone about is his own fault, for he has
exposed too much to view the mechanism of his work; but it is also the fault of the public for not asking of
him a picture of things as they were.
Man is by nature a creature of the present. It is only by an effort that he can consider the future, it is often
quite impossible for him to give any heed at all to the Past. The days of old are so blurred and remote that it
seems right to him that any relic from them should, by the maltreatment of Time, be unrecognisable. The
finding of an old sword, half-eaten by rust, will only please him in so far as it shows him once more by its sad
condition the great gap between those days and these, and convinces him again of the sole importance of the
present. The archæologist, he will tell you, is a fool if he expects him to be interested in a wretched old bit of
scrap-iron. He is right. It would be as rash to suppose that he would find interest in an ancient sword in its
rusted condition as it would be to expect the spectator at Rheims to find fascination in the nuts and screws.
The true archæologist would hide that corroded weapon in his workshop, where his fellow-workers alone
could see it. For he recognises that it is only the sword which is as good as new that impresses the public; it is
only the Present that counts. That is the real reason why he is an archæologist. He has turned to the Past
because he is in love with the Present. He, more than any man, worships at the altar of the goddess of To-day;
and he is so desirous of extending her dominion that he has adventured, like a crusader, into the lands of the
Past in order to subject them to her. Adoring the Now, he would resent the publicity of anything which so
obviously suggested the Then as a rust-eaten old blade. His whole business is to hide the gap between
Yesterday and To-day; and, unless a man is initiate, he would have him either see the perfect sword as it was
when it sought the foeman's bowels, or see nothing. The Present is too small for him; and it is therefore that he
calls so insistently to the Past to come forth from the darkness to augment it. The ordinary man lives in the
Present, and he will tell one that the archæologist lives in the Past. This is not so. The layman, in the manner
of the Little Englander, lives in a small and confined Present; but the archæologist, like a true Imperialist,
ranges through all time, and calls it not the Past but the Greater Present.
The archæologist is not, or ought not to be, lacking in vivacity. One might say that he is so sensible to the
charms of society that, finding his companions too few in number, he has drawn the olden times to him to
search them for jovial men and agreeable women. It might be added that he has so laughed at jest and joke
that, fearing lest the funds of humour run dry, he has gathered the laughter of all the years to his enrichment.
Certainly he has so delighted in noble adventure and stirring action that he finds his newspaper insufficient to
his needs, and fetches to his aid the tales of old heroes. In fact, the archæologist is so enamoured of life that he
would raise all the dead from their graves. He will not have it that the men of old are dust: he would bring
them to him to share with him the sunlight which he finds so precious. He is so much an enemy of Death and
Decay that he would rob them of their harvest; and, for every life the foe has claimed, he would raise up, if he
could, a memory that would continue to live.
The meaning of the heading which has been given to this chapter is now becoming clear, and the direction of
the argument is already apparent. So far it has been my purpose to show that the archæologist is not a
rag-and-bone man, though the public generally thinks he is, and he often thinks he is himself. The attempt has
been made to suggest that archæology ought not to consist in sitting in a charnel-house amongst the dead, but
rather in ignoring that place and taking the bones into the light of day, decently clad in flesh and finery. It has
now to be shown in what manner this parading of the Past is needful to the gaiety of the Present.
Amongst cultured people whose social position makes it difficult for them to dance in circles on the grass in
order to express or to stimulate their gaiety, and whose school of deportment will not permit them to sing a
merry song of sixpence as they trip down the streets, there is some danger of the fire of merriment dying for
want of fuel. Vivacity in printed books, therefore, has been encouraged, so that the mind at least, if not the
body, may skip about and clap its hands. A portly gentleman with a solemn face, reading his 'Punch' in the
club, is, after all, giving play to precisely those same humours which in ancient days might have led him, like
CHAPTER III. 25
Georgy Porgy, to kiss the girls or to perform any other merry joke. It is necessary, therefore, ever to enlarge
the stock of things humorous, vivacious, or rousing, if thoughts are to be kept young and eyes bright in this
age of restraint. What would Yuletide be without the olden times to bolster it? What would the Christmas
numbers do without the pictures of our great-grandparents' coaches snow-bound, of huntsmen of the
eighteenth century, of jesters at the courts of the barons? What should we do without the 'Vicar of Wakefield,'
the 'Compleat Angler,' 'Pepys' Diary,' and all the rest of the ancient books? And, going back a few centuries,
what an amount we should miss had we not 'Æsop's Fables,' the 'Odyssey,' the tales of the Trojan War, and so
on. It is from the archæologist that one must expect the augmentation of this supply; and just in that degree in
which the existing supply is really a necessary part of our equipment, so archæology, which looks for more, is
necessary to our gaiety.
[Illustration: PL. VII. Lady rouging herself: she holds a mirror and rouge-pot. --FROM A PAPYRUS,
TURIN.]
[Illustration: Dancing girl turning a back somersault.--NEW KINGDOM.]
In order to keep his intellect undulled by the routine of his dreary work, Matthew Arnold was wont to write a
few lines of poetry each day. Poetry, like music and song, is an effective dispeller of care; and those who find
Omar Khayyam or "In Memoriam" incapable of removing the of burden of their woes, will no doubt
appreciate the "Owl and the Pussy-cat," or the Bab Ballads. In some form or other verse and song are closely
linked with happiness; and a ditty from any age has its interests and its charm.
"She gazes at the stars above: I would I were the skies, That I might gaze upon my love With such a thousand
eyes!"
That is probably from the Greek of Plato, a writer who is not much read by the public at large, and whose
works are the legitimate property of the antiquarian. It suffices to show that it is not only to the moderns that
we have to look for dainty verse that is conducive to a light heart. The following lines are from the ancient
Egyptian:--
